Over the past few years a number of new mathematical functions have been proposed for wind speed probability density distributions. The most commonly used function that has been cited in literature has been the two-parameter Weibull function. However, in recent years studies have shown that the two-parameter Weibull function might be inadequate in modeling the wind speed probability density distributions or independent of whether the distribution is of unimodal or bimodal nature. For the unimodal distributions, the inadequacy may be due to the intricate behavior of the distribution, which prevents it to be satisfyingly modeled by a two-parameter model. For the bimodal behavior, the two-parameter Weibull function, which produces only a unimodal distribution, is simply inadequate to model it appropriately. Therefore, in recent years, alternative functions have been suggested for both unimodal and bimodal distributions, seeking more involved functions to better model these distributions. This article involves the modeling of observed wind speed probability density distributions using the main body of models found in the literature, namely, Rayleigh, Lognormal, two-parameter Weibull, three-parameter Weibull, and bimodal Weibull probability distribution functions. One of the important steps in the evaluation of different functions is the interpretation of the statistical parameters, namely, slope, R2, mean bias error, and root mean squared error, as are presently used in this article. A novel statistical tool is developed in the present article using these four statistical parameters. The novel tool can be used to evaluate the relative performance of models when more than one model is involved or to determine the overall accuracy of a particular model for a specific site. The calculations are made based on the long term wind speed data collected at 4-s interval at the experimental site at Edinburgh Napier University.
The probabilistic distribution of wind speed is one of the important wind characteristics for the assessment of wind energy potential and performance of wind energy conversion systems, as well as the structural and environmental design and analysis. A thorough understanding of the characteristics of wind regimes in which a wind turbine is expected to work is a prerequisite for the successful planning and implementation of any wind power project. The knowledge of wind velocity distribution at different time scales and quantum of energy associated with these wind spectra is essential for the proper sizing and siting of a wind energy project. Once the probability density distribution (or alternatively known as relative frequency distribution) is known, the wind power density (thus wind energy output) can easily be obtained. Knowing the probability density distribution and the corresponding power density distribution, one can assess the economic viability of installing a wind energy conversion system at a particular location. Therefore, the probability distributions and the functions representing them mathematically have been the main tools used in the wind energy related literature. As stated by Ramirez ,3 a large number of studies have been published, which propose the use of a variety of standard parametric probability distribution functions to describe wind speed frequency distributions. This article involves the modeling of observed wind speed probability density distributions using the main models found in the literature, namely, Rayleigh, Lognormal, two-parameter Weibull, three-parameter Weibull, and bimodal Weibull probability distribution functions. The probability density and the corresponding cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) considered in the present article are presented in Table I.
PROBABILITY DENSITY
 Over the years, a large number of studies have been published that present the use of a variety of probability density functions (PDF) to describe wind speed frequency distributions. At the present time, however, it is the two-parameter Weibull function that is the most widely used and accepted in the specialized literature on wind energy and other renewable energy sources . 4,5 The two-parameter Weibull function has experienced the widest use in the specialized literature on wind energy. This is due to its appeal of wide applicability, flexibility, and usefulness for describing the wind speed distribution. Several authors have indicated that the Weibull function should not be used in a generalized way, as it is unable to represent some wind regimes, such as those that describe wind speed frequency histograms, which present bimodality or bitangentiality. The parameters c and k of the Weibull function have been studied for many locations. 11–13 However, when there is no detailed measured data for a particular site except for the mean wind speed, some approximations may be used to assume a Weibull distribution; the scale parameter is usually slightly bigger (10%) than the mean wind speed for values of shape parameters between 1.5 and 3.0, while the scale parameter is half of the mean wind speed for value of shape parameters close to 1.0. Also note that higher values of c indicate higher mean wind speeds, while the value of k indicates wind stability. There are several methods presented in the literature to identify the parameters of the Weibull function. The Weibull function relates the mean wind speed vm to its scale and shape parameters; thusvm=cΓ(1+1k),where the gamma function Γ can be solved using the Stirling approximation given byΓ(x)=2πxxx−1ex[1+112x+1288x2+…].
 The Rayleigh and lognormal functions were proposed as alternatives to the Weibull function. The Rayleigh function is a special and simplified case of the Weibull function. It is obtained when the shape parameter k of the Weibull model is assumed to be equal to 2. One of the most distinct advantages of the Rayleigh distribution is that the PDF and the CDF may be obtained from the mean value of the wind speed and therefore offers a convenient and simple approach. The Rayleigh model has been widely used to fit the observed probability density distributions, and its validity was shown for various locations by numerous researchers . 1,18,19 In essence, the classic Weibull function is theoretically not a universal model, or no single model could be expected to give good results at all stations since wind patterns are different due to various reasons. Modifications to the two-parameter Weibull function were therefore suggested for better results. Among those, the hybrid Weibull model, a slight modification to the Weibull function, was proposed to improve the modeling at low wind speeds . 20 A three-parameter Weibull function was also utilized in some studies and was found to provide improved fitness and flexibility than the classical Weibull function. Tuller and Brett 21 and Xiao et al.22 suggested two alternative PDFs to two-parameter Weibull, namely, the type I extreme value distribution and three-parameter Weibull function. Xiao et al.22 reported that although three of the PDFs are all suitable for describing the probability distribution of the extreme wind speed data, the type I and the three-parameter Weibull function are more appropriate compared to the two-parameter Weibull. Regarding the bimodal distribution, there are hypotheses as to the cause of bimodal nature of the distribution. For La Ventosa, Mexico, Jaramillo and Borja 10 related this to two different types of winds, namely, mountain-gap generated wind phenomenon and that caused by local effects as sea breeze. Thus, the frequency distribution for that particular location is established by both mountain-gap wind phenomenon and sea breeze winds. The mountain-gap phenomenon produces exceptional wind speeds due to the effect of strong cross-mountain pressure gradient, constituting the second mode with an average wind speed of around 14.2 m/s. The sea breeze wind, however, caused by the temperature difference when the sea surface is colder than the adjacent land, constitutes the first mode with low wind speed potential. In recent years, some studies have shown that the classic two-parameter Weibull function may be inadequate in modeling the wind speed distributions that show such bimodal behavior. Thus, an alternative more involved functions such as the two-component mixture Weibull distribution (bimodal Weibull) have been suggested to better model the bimodal behavior of wind regimes . 10 Jaramillo and Borja 10 showed that the wind speed distribution in La Ventosa, Mexico, is not represented well by the typical two-parameter Weibull function. Therefore, they also used bimodal Weibull to analyze the wind speed frequency distribution in that region. It is reported that the analysis of wind data showed that computing the capacity factor for wind power plants to be installed in La Ventosa must be carried out by means of a bimodal function instead of the typical Weibull function. Otherwise, the capacity factor is underpredicted. The bimodal Weibull model was also used for wind power density and wind turbine energy output estimations . 21 Tuller and Brett 21 concluded that their proposed bimodal model was more realistic than the unimodal probability models normally commonly used in scientific literature. The bimodal probability model’s estimation of the annual energy generated by a pitch regulated wind turbine gives a closer result to the energy calculated from the sample data than estimations made through the unimodal probability models. Carta and Ramirez 4 analyzed the statistical characteristics of hourly mean wind speed data recorded at 16 weather stations located in the Canarian Archipelago. As a result of this analysis, they showed that the typical two-parameter Weibull function does not accurately represent all wind regimes observed in that region. However, a singly truncated from below normal Weibull mixture distribution and the bimodal Weibull distribution provide very good fits for both unimodal and bimodal wind speed frequency distributions observed in that region and offer less relative errors in determining the annual mean wind power density. Carta and Ramirez 23 presented methods to calculate the five parameters of bimodal Weibull distribution, namely, method of moments, the Maximum likelihood method, and the least-squares method. They applied these methods to the hourly mean wind speed data recorded at four weather stations located on the island of Gran Canaria (Canarian Archipelago, Spain). They concluded that the least-squares method provides the highest degree of fit in all the stations analyzed, though the difference with respect to the other two estimation methods is not significant. There is, in conclusion, no significant difference between the different methods employed in describing wind power probability density distributions. Furthermore, more models were studied elsewhere, including the three-parameter lognormal, generalized extreme value, variations in the gamma family (Pearson type, log-Pearson, and the generalized gamma), and square-root normal, seeking either to find more accurate models or to improve the existing models . 24,25 Note that the Weibull distribution itself is a special case of the generalized gamma distribution.
The present model evaluations are based on the wind speed data measured at the experimental site at Edinburgh Napier University. The wind speed data have been collected at the experimental site at the top of the School of Engineering’s building at a height of 30 m at 4-s interval. A total of 18 months of wind speed data was collected spanning from August 2007 to January 2009 inclusive. These measurements were made possible by a grant provided under the Scottish Research Infrastructure Funding Programme. Some of the observed probability density distributions for the available data are given in Fig. 1. The monthly mean speeds vary between 2.7 and 5.9 m/s for the presently analyzed data. As can be seen in Fig. 1 for January 2008, which is the windiest month with a mean value of 5.9 m/s, the observed probability density distribution shows a bimodal behavior. For this particular urban site, the bimodal nature of the distribution is thought to be due to the prevailing turbulence caused primarily by the tall buildings nearby and also by the topography of the location. However, as the mean wind speed becomes smaller the curves become more peaked, as can be seen for October 2007, which is characterized by a sharp peak indicating little wind potential with a mean value of 3.0 m/s. The following statistical parameters are used in the following sections to quantitatively evaluate the performance of each function presently used. The slope of the best-fit line, given by Eq. (3), between the computed and measured variables is desired to be equal to one. Slope values exceeding one indicate overestimation, while slope values under one indicate underestimation of the computed variable,s=∑(PDo−PD¯o)(PDc−PD¯c)∑(PDo−PD¯o)2.
Note that PDc is the calculated probability density, PDo is the observed and PD¯ is the mean value of the given probability density (PDc or PDo). The coefficient of determination (R2) is the ratio of explained variation to the total variation given byR2=[∑(PDo−PD¯o)(PDc−PD¯c)∑(PDo−PD¯o)2∑(PDc−PD¯c)2]2.
R2 lies between zero and one. A high value of R2, thus indicating a lower unexplained variation, is desirable. R2 is often used to judge the adequacy of a regression model, but it should not be the sole criterion for choosing a particular model; as in general terms, the value of R2 increases with the number of coefficients in the model. The root mean squared error (RMSE) gives a value of the level of scatter that the model produces. This is an important statistical test as it highlights the readability and repeatability of the model. It provides a term-by-term comparison of the actual deviation between the predicted and the measured values. Since it is a measure of the absolute deviation, RMSE is always positive. A lower absolute value of RMSE indicates a better model. Mathematically, it is given by the following equation:RMSE=∑(PDc−PDo)2n.
The mean bias error (MBE) provides an indication of the trend of the model, whether it has a tendency to underpredict or overpredict the modeled values. MBE can be expressed either as a percentage or as an absolute value. Nevertheless, within a data set an overestimation of one observation can cancel an underestimation of another. A MBE nearest to zero is desired. It is given by the following equation:MBE=∑(PDc−PDo)n.
 One of the important steps in the evaluation of different functions is the interpretation of different statistical parameters, namely, slope, R2, MBE, and RMSE, as were used in the present article. Therefore, an overall accuracy score is required to facilitate a discrete comparison between different models. In the present article, a novel statistical tool is developed based on a similar tool developed earlier by Muneer ,26 deriving from the fundamental concepts to give an overall accuracy score for each function using the four aforementioned statistical parameters. Figure 2(a) shows a slope that has a large deviation from the ideally sought value of 1.0 but a high value of R2, whereas in Fig. 2(b) the slope is very close to ideal value, but a low value of R2 is realized due to large data scatter. Therefore case (b) would be preferable over case (a). Similarly, Fig. 2(c) presents a smaller but systematic trend of deviation—notice the negative deviations in the middle range, with positive outcomes at the lower and higher ends. In the case of Fig. 2(d), an almost equal spread of positive and negative but larger deviations is noticed. Although case (d) would both provide a much higher value of MBE, case (d) would, however, be preferable over case (c). Overall, it can be concluded that the slope parameter provides a much more important indication of the validity of any given model. The R2 of the line fitted between computed and observed data, MBE, and RMSE for the given model’s deviation provide second order information as higher values of R2 or lower values of MBE and RMSE do not warrant a better model. Ideally, the latter three parameters ought to be examined only in conjunction with the value of slope. The following overall accuracy score is proposed with varying weighting factors of 3, 1, 1, and 1 for s, R2, RMSE, and MBE, respectively:Ψ=3[1−|1−s|]+[R2]+[1−RMSERMSEmax]+[1−|MBE||MBE|max].
Note that s and R2 are dimensionless, unlike RMSE and MBE, and therefore the latter two are divided by the values of RMSEmax and |MBE|max. The latter is the largest values among all models for a particular month. Ψ is a convenient index, by means of which it is possible to compare the performance of any suite of models. Therefore, for a perfect fit the overall accuracy score Ψ will be 6. The maximum obtainable score per statistical indicator is unity; therefore, overall, a model would have a maximum obtainable score of 6. Note that this is due to the fact that the slope parameter has been weighted with a factor of 3. It should be noted that obtaining the maximum score does not necessarily imply that the model is accurate and best performing; it only indicates that the model yields better results compared to the other models in the evaluation.
In the present study, the suitability of the functions is assessed based on both probability density and cumulative distributions. The latter is particularly used as alternative to the former to try to improve the quality of the fits. Figure 3 presents the observed probability density distribution for October 2007, which is one of the least windy months, together with the distributions obtained from the PDFs. It is observed that the Rayleigh model leads to distributions that greatly over- or underpredict the observed distribution, while the Weibull, three-parameter Weibull, and lognormal functions highly overpredict wind speeds greater than 2, 4, and 5 m/s, respectively. Bimodal Weibull PDF provides a close fit throughout the entire wind speed spectrum. The observed probability density distribution for January 2008, which is the windiest month, together with the distributions obtained from the PDFs, is presented in Fig. 4. Note that the observed probability density distribution for this particular month is of bimodal nature. As can be expected, the models such as Rayleigh, lognormal, Weibull, and three-parameter Weibull models are unable to model this bimodal behavior, leading to distributions that greatly over- or underpredict the observed distribution. The Weibull and three-parameter Weibull models lead to almost identical distribution curves. On the other hand, the bimodal Weibull function provides the best fit, producing very close distribution curve to the observed data. Note that the bimodal Weibull model provides the best fit regardless whether the distribution is of bimodal or unimodal nature. The model parameters of the functions, obtained from the fit of PDFs to the observed probability density distributions, and the corresponding mean wind speed values calculated from the PDFs are given in Tables II and III, respectively, for all the data currently studied. As can be seen from Table II, the Rayleigh parameters of c do not conform to the expected vm=cπ/4 relationship due to the fact that the Rayleigh distribution proves too approximate to the observed one. However, they are quite close to those of the Weibull function. Overall, the shape parameters of the Weibull function are very close to 1. For the three-parameter Weibull function, the γ parameter is very close to zero in most of the months, meaning that it becomes equivalent to two-parameter Weibull function. In these cases, the c and k parameters of the former function are very similar to those of the latter. For the bimodal Weibull function, the first set of parameters c1 and k1 is somewhat different than the usual c and k values. However, the second set of parameters is within the expected limits. From Table III, overall, the mean wind speeds calculated from the bimodal Weibull function parameters are closest to the observed ones, while the other models exceedingly overpredict the observed mean wind speed values. The statistical parameters for fits of PDFs are presented in Table IV for some of the months currently analyzed. Figures 5 and 6 show the observed wind speed distribution in cumulative format for October 2007 and January 2008, respectively, with the distributions obtained from the CDFs. In Fig. 5, the Rayleigh model provides an inadequate fit, and the lognormal significantly overpredicts the cumulative frequency up to 6 m/s. The remaining functions provide very close values to those of observed values. For the case of January 2008, the Rayleigh function still significantly over- and underpredicts the observed cumulative distribution. The parameters of the functions obtained from the fit of CDFs to the observed cumulative distributions are given in Table V. From Table V, the Rayleigh parameters of c now are more close to expected vm=cπ/4 relationship because the Rayleigh distribution is much more close to the observed cumulative distribution than it was to the observed probability density distribution. Furthermore, they are almost identical to those of the Weibull function. For the three-parameter Weibull function, the γ parameters are distinctly different from zero, and interestingly the c and k parameters of it are very close to those of the Weibull function. For the bimodal Weibull cumulative function, unlike the bimodal Weibull PDF, the ω parameter can have either positive or negative values. Note that positive ω values are usually around 0. 4–0.5, while the negative values are usually less than −1. The mean wind speed values calculated from the probability density distributions obtained from the cumulative distributions are also given in Table V. From this table, it is interesting to note that compared to the mean wind values from the PDFs, those from the cumulative distributions are significantly closer to the observed ones. Because the main wind energy related parameters such as mean wind speed or wind power density are calculated from the probability density distributions, the cumulative distribution should be converted to probability density distribution. The probability density distributions obtained from the cumulative distribution are presented in Fig. 7 for October 2007. The probability density distributions converted from the cumulative ones for January 2008 can be seen in Fig. 8. As can be seen from Figs. 7 and 8, the probability density distributions obtained from the cumulative distribution are substantially different from those obtained directly from the PDFs. The statistical parameters for probability density distributions obtained from the CDFs are given in Table VI for some months. However, it is difficult to independently interpret the individual parameters; therefore, as a more robust indication as the goodness of different functions, the accuracy score developed earlier is applied to the statistical parameters given in Tables IV and VI. The monthly accuracy scores for PDF and CDF are presented in Tables VII–IX; for PDFs, in Table VII; for CDFs, in Table VIII; and for relative distributions obtained from the CDFs, in Table IX. As can be seen from Table VII, the average ψ changes between 2.55 and 5.83 for the PDFs. The highest ψ is provided by the bimodal Weibull function with a significantly large margin, followed by the lognormal function with ψ value of 4.77. The Rayleigh function is the least accurate model with an overall ψ of 2.38. The Weibull and three-parameter Weibull functions return mediocre ψ, though the former proves a better model than the latter for this particular data set. For the case of relative distributions obtained from the CDFs as given in Table IX, it is interesting to note that the three-parameter Weibull leads to the highest ψ with a value of 5.52, followed by the Weibull function with a score of 5.46. The bimodal Weibull function achieves an overall score of 5.38. The Rayleigh and lognormal functions lead to the lowest ψ scores with values of 3.90 and 3.56, respectively. When individual models are compared for their performance in terms of PDFs and CDFs, it is observed that the Rayleigh, Weibull, and the three-parameter Weibull functions perform better when they are fitted to cumulative distributions, while the bimodal Weibull and lognormal functions perform better when the fitting is based on the probability density distributions. The most significant improvement occurs with the three-parameter Weibull function when it is fitted to the cumulative distribution, while the lognormal function deteriorates most when it is fitted to the cumulative distribution.
In the present article, an intercomparison of wind speed probability distribution models has been undertaken. Most of the commonly used PDF and CDF used in the literature have been included, namely, Rayleigh, lognormal, Weibull, three-parameter Weibull, and bimodal Weibull functions. Needed as the most important aspect of evaluating such functions, a novel statistical tool was presently developed so that an overall accuracy score can be obtained for the models studied. The numerical values of the relevant parameters were obtained from the wind speed data collected at Napier University for a period of 18 months. The most important results arising from the current work undertaken are the following.
 Not any single statistical parameter can adequately be an indication of the goodness of a model. A composite evaluation index for intercomparing the models was therefore presently developed.
 The question raised in recent years as to the inadequacy of the Weibull function in modeling the wind speed distributions was somewhat substantiated as being correct; thus, and alternative, more complicated functions are needed to better model wind speed distributions, either unimodal or bimodal.
 Based on the PDFs, the mean wind speeds calculated from the bimodal Weibull function parameters are closest to the observed ones by a large margin, distantly followed by the lognormal function. When compared to the mean wind values from the PDFs, those from the cumulative distributions are significantly closer to the observed ones, the bimodal Weibull function returning the best prediction of mean wind speeds.
 Considering the presently developed accuracy score, ψ changes between 2.55 and 5.83 for the PDFs. The highest ψ is provided by the bimodal Weibull function, followed by the lognormal function with value of ψ of 4.77. The Rayleigh function is the least accurate model with an overall ψ of 2.55. It should be noted that the lognormal model constitutes a significant alternative to the Weibull model as both of them have two parameters.
 For the case of probability density distributions obtained from the CDFs, the three-parameter Weibull leads to the highest ψ with a value of 5.52, followed by the Weibull and bimodal Weibull functions with scores of 5.46 and 5.38, respectively.
 When individual models are compared for their performance in terms of their PDFs and CDFs, it is observed that the Rayleigh, Weibull, and the three-parameter Weibull functions perform better when they are fitted to cumulative distributions, while the bimodal and lognormal functions perform better when the fitting is based on the probability density distributions.
 Orography is the study of the physical geography of mountains and mountain ranges. Topography in general is concerned with local detail including vegetative and human-made features. In this study data from one urban site were used to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of a number of PDF models. It was shown herein that the bimodal Weibull function provides the best estimates of wind speeds. A number of studies such as the present, undertaken for a variety of topographic and orographic situations, will be needed to develop a more generalized pattern of results. Those results may then be used to specify the suitability of a given model or set of models for a given orography or topography.
 It is quite possible that the present findings related to the suitability of bimodal distribution to our database might be due to the presence of nearby buildings and spacing. Thus future researchers working on urban wind speed data may wish to explore this point further.