The content of this review consists of the types and the parameters influencing the performance (electrical and thermal) and also covers the numerical, analytical, and experimental models of photovoltaic thermal (PVT) collectors. The PVT systems using air and water as heat extraction agents were discussed. The parameters affecting the PVT performance such as the glazing, mass flow rate, and influence of absorber and design types were discussed in details. From the exergy analysis, it was found that the unglazed collector gives better total (electrical+thermal) exergy, whereas the energy analysis favors the glazed collectors. From the literature review, it is obvious that the PVT systems are very useful in the future. There are no substantial initiatives taken in order to reduce the cost and to make PVT collectors favorable. Increasing the competitiveness of PVT collectors will enhance the utilization of renewable energy devices. This communication was done to ease future studies to be conducted by researchers.
Oil is one of the dominant sources of energy in the world. Increase in oil prices has created an inflationary pressure in the economic field which influenced the interest rates and investments . 27 One of the wise approaches taken by scientists is introducing a renewable source of energy, in this case, solar energy. Solar energy technology, which is also known as photovoltaic (PV) technology, has developed within a decade. There are many applications of PV thermal (PVT) technology such as for water and space heating, solar drying, building integrated skins (façades), and many more. In water and space heating, the systems contain PV module combined with solar thermal collector where the heat on the rear side is used for heating purposes and is not disposed of into the environment. The application of PV as façades has been given great attention by constructors and engineers around the world. The benefits of PV as façades such as electricity generation, thermal energy, and daylighting have played an important role in the development of this double-façades technology. By proper design configuration of PV, integrated double façades could result in the increase in electrical and thermal efficiencies and also improve the daylighting effect. PV/thermal collectors, or more generally known as PVT collectors, are devices that operate simultaneously to convert solar energy from the sun into two other useful energies, namely, electricity and heat. Figure 1 below shows the schematic of a PVT collector and its component. There have been many review articles, such as those of Kalogirou and Tripanagnostopoulos 23 and Zondag ,34 that conducted studies on PVT collectors. Various system designs have been developed to remove the excess heat generated and to utilize it as a source of energy for variety of applications, either domestic or industrial applications . 23 In the present paper, the details will concentrate more on the types of the PVT collectors and their related characteristics and properties. Furthermore, the building integrated PVT (BIPVT) collectors will be discussed. Systems consisting of solar energy are important for reducing the building energy consumption. Thus, PV integrated in building, known as BIPV, which replaces the building elements such as roof tiles, asphalt shingles, and façade elements, performs a similar function, but at the same time it provides electricity. It is noticeable that BIPV influences significantly heat transfer and its effect on building’s cooling and heating loads. The well-designed ventilated walls, façades, and roofs can cater to reduce considerably thermal loads due to direct sun radiation during Summer. BIPV with ventilated air-gap and nonventilated air-gap during Summer and Winter, respectively, shows that the cooling and heating loads are both reduced. The objective of this work is to provide an easy literature review, which is able to provide useful information on PVT technology.
The solar thermal collectors have been introduced since the 19th century. However, the PV cells had been produced since 1950s. The price of solar cells was still high during 1960s. However, due to the oil price hikes, the consciousness of importance of renewable energy sources has risen in many countries. The PVT application projects were launched together with the terrestrial application of solar cells, although they were previously considered expensive. PVT collectors can be divided into four types—flat-plate collectors, concentrating collectors, hybrid collectors (water/air), and BIPVT.

 The flat-plate collector and concentrating collector diagrams are shown in Figs. 1 and 2, respectively. The PV panel is attached on top of the absorber plate. Other components such as the insulation, glass cover, and the absorber plate with tubes are clearly shown. The first air hybrid collector was employed by the University of Delaware. The hybrid collector was integrated into the building roof, which was also known as “Solar One” house in the mentioned university. The collector used air as coolant. To increase the irradiance of PV modules, concentrators are used. There has been a study on PVT solar collector with compound parabolic concentrator (CPC) and fins by Othman et al.26 and Brogren et al. Figure 2 shows that the CPCs concentrate solar radiation attached to the PV cells. The fins on the back of the PV panel increase heat transfer to the air and enhance the efficiency of the system. Optical efficiency of a water-cooled PVT hybrid system with low concentrating aluminum CPCs is discussed by Brogren et al. A new miniature concentrating PV (MCPV) and thermal system, which was to produce both electrical and thermal energies, was developed by Kribus et al. It was developed to provide energy to nearby users, which were not only a small-scale application. The heat produced from the MCPV was not only for low-temperature usage. The MCPV system, which was under development, produced about 140–180 W of electricity and 400–500 W of thermal energy. The estimated cost to develop the MCPV system was low compared to current flat-plate PV. Figure 3 shows the variation in the overall system efficiency for production of electricity, heat, and CHP, with the coolant outlet temperature shown also. Temperature ranges for potential thermal applications are shown as well. It can be shown that the concentrating collectors, which concentrate more solar radiation onto the PV cells, yield better performance compared to flat-plate collectors.
Air type collectors versus water
 Air type PVT collectors are differentiated by looking at their air flow pattern. The differences can be seen by looking whether the flow of air is above, under, or on both sides of the absorber. In the water PVT collectors, it is also distinguished by considering the water flow customs. Air based PVT collector is more preferred than water based PVT collector due to its low cost and less material usage. This method of extracting heat through air can be operated either by natural flow or by forced flow of air. However, heat extraction by circulating air method is limited because of the low density, small volumetric heat capacity, and small thermal conductivity of air. Due to these few negative effects of air based PVT system, water has been used as a coolant. An experiment carried out by He et al.16 showed that by adopting water as heat extraction agent, the efficiency of the PVT system can be increased.

 Due to the vast benefits of PVT technology, it can be utilized in many types of applications such as in buildings and other industrial applications. Chow et al.8 did a research on the BIPVT thermal applications in subtropical hotel building. They came up with a computational model that was based on 260 m2 monocrystalline silicon PV wall on a 30-storey building. They found that different designs, which are the BIPV, PV/T, and PV/C, exhibit short-term electrical performances but have similar long-term electricity yields. This means that there is no significant difference in the electricity output of the three designs due to continuous cooling of the solar cell through the external façade. They also concluded that placing the PV panel at the lower portion of the collector could improve the system. It was also mentioned that the weather conditions and the operational mode determine the effect on the productivity of PV. Anderson et al.1 conducted a theoretical study on the BIPVT solar collector through the use of modified Hottel–Whillier model. They further validated the experimental data by testing a prototype of the collector. They found that there are several parameters that influence the performance of BIPVT collector. They also suggested a way to improve the use of steel as collector coating, which is by maximizing the ratio of cooling tube width to spacing. This method was shown to improve electrical and thermal efficiencies. From Fig. 4, the reduction in the inclination of BIPVT reduces the thermal efficiency. Further research showed that it is cost-saving to integrate BIPVT into the building roof than onto it. Guiavarch and Peuportier 15 developed and implemented dynamic simulation tool to model the BIPVT. They conducted a case study on two typical building to evaluate the performance of multicrystalline silicon PV collector integrated into the buildings. They found that the efficiency of the unventilated PV module installed on the roof was 14%, whereas the ventilated measures had 20%. They concluded that when the integration of PV with the buildings is done properly where the PV collector can be used to preheat the ventilation air, the PV performance can be improved. Liao et al.25 presented numerical study on BIPVT based on the two dimensional (2D) computational fluid dynamics (CFD) model. They further conducted their research experimentally on full scale outdoor test facility and found that the experimental measurements showed great agreement with the CFD model. A simulation study on different configurations of PVT collectors was conducted by Adnan et al. In their study, they designed seven collector designs—from the simplest design of oscillatory flow design to more complex parallel-serpentine flow design. The simulation that was analyzed under different solar radiations and ambient temperatures showed that the spiral flow design yield the highest performance. The thermal efficiency of the design is 50.12%, while the cell efficiency is 14.98%. They also suggested that the efficiency of PVT collectors can be further improved by utilizing different types of cell such as amorphous silicon cell due to its black surface.
EXPERIMENTAL, NUMERICAL, AND ANALYTICAL MODELS
 It is well known that PVT systems were separate systems that consist of a single solar collector and a PV module. They were attached together and worked simultaneously to generate electricity and thermal energy. The performance of a PVT collector deteriorates when the temperature of the system rises. The separate conventional flat-plate solar collector has a steady state thermal efficiency (ηth), which can be calculated from Eq. (1), where the heat collected Qu is given by Eq. (2),5ηth=QuG,Qu=ṁCp(T0−Ti).
For the separate PV module, electrical efficiency (ηel) is given byηel=ImVmGAc.
As mentioned previously, the performance of PV modules decreases as the temperature increases. As mentioned by Zondag et al.,35 the reliability of PV module performance on the temperature is given by the following:ηel=η0(1−β[T−25 °C]),where β is the coefficient of temperature. The value of β is 0.0045 °C−1.
Experimental 
 He et al.16 carried out an experimental rig design for natural flow, which was tested in the city of Hefai, 32° N, 117° E, in a South-facing position and with tilt angle of 32°. From the daily tests taken on the experimental rig, the electrical efficiency obtained was 4.6% based on the ratio of mass of water in thermosyphon system and collector surface area (M/Ac) of 75 kg/m2. The result in Fig. 5 shows that the values of thermal efficiency (ηth) were low because all efficiency terms were based on collector area, which covers 50% of the absorber surface. Erdil et al.14 built a hybrid system consist of a PV module and a solar thermal collector and tested it for energy collection in Cyprus. They used two PV modules at an area of about 1.2 m2. Two modules were used in their experiment to provide convenience during different seasons (i.e., one module in Summer). In their work, they used glass as glazing and water as cooling agent because of the high transmittance of the two media. From the results obtained, they found out that the ratio of gain to losses for thermal energy is 50 times the electrical energy, which was measured between the periods of 1200 and 1600 h. Figure 6 shows the time plot of thermal energy gain and electrical energy loss, EL. The economic analysis by applying the simple payback period method resulted in that their system built costs about 219 Euro for the payback period of 1.7 years. Huang et al.21 carried out an experiment to compare the efficiency of an integrated PVT solar (IPVTS) system with conventional solar water heater. The IPVTS was introduced with its cost-saving and space saving purpose. From their work, they concluded that the corrugated polycarbonate panes used have good thermal efficiency. Further test results showed that the primary-energy saving efficiency of IPVTS was above 0.60, which is more than that of a pure solar water heater or pure PV system. Furthermore, they also found out that the characteristic daily efficiency ns∗=0.38, and this value was 76% of the efficiency of the conventional solar water heater using glazed collector (ns∗=0.50) (refer to Fig. 7). Scientists at Politecnico de Milan carried out a program to monitor the development and performance of hybrid PVT air collector. They produced a simulation model to predict the performance of the system built. Energy balances for different components of the hybrid PVT collector, namely, PV cells, glass panes, air-gap, and absorber plate, were used as base for developing the simulation model. They built a prototype of the system and acquired data acquisition with 10 min intervals for three clear sky days. A comparison between the simulation model calculations and experimental results for two performance parameters, namely, the electrical power produced and the outlet temperature of PV collectors, was obtained. From the research, it was shown that the performance of the PVT collector increases when nearing the warm season when the outlet air temperature could reach up to 40 °C. From the program, they developed the tetto integrate solarizzato, i.e., integrated solar roof, whereby the technology was further used in real application. Tonui and Tripanagnostopoulos 31 reported a cheap and simple method to cool the PVT system. They introduced a method to effectively extract heat from the back wall of the air duct using a suspended thin metallic sheet. From thermal efficiency tests, it was found that the modified system gives a higher performance and increased the electrical and thermal outputs. They further investigated two methods, namely, using a thin metal sheet suspended at the middle and fins attached to the back wall, which could improve the heat extraction from the system. The validation done showed constructive results between predicted and measured data. Sopian et al.29 developed and tested a double pass PVT solar collector, which is suitable for solar drying purposes. Analysis was taken based on the energy balance equations at different positions such as the cover (glass), flow inlet and outlet channels, and back plate. They also made comparisons between the experimental results and theoretical results and found close agreements between the values that were reported.
Numerical 
 Zondag et al.35 developed four numerical models, three steady state one dimensional (1D), 2D, and three dimensional (3D) models, and one 3D dynamical model to predict the performance of PVT collectors. They concluded that the 1D steady state model yields performance as well as the other more time consuming 2D and 3D models. The thermal efficiency of the dynamical model was found to be 54.4% and, for the steady state model, 54.2%. The small difference indicated that the dynamical effects can be neglected for accurate calculation of the annual efficiency. They also reported that the 2D and 3D models are more easily adapted to other configurations and provide more detailed information, as required for a further optimization of the collector.
Analytical 
 Dubey et al.13 developed an analytical expression for electrical efficiency of PV module either with or without duct, which is a function of climatic and design parameters. They considered four different configurations of PV modules, which are glass to glass PV module with and without duct and glass to tedlar PV module also with and without duct. They concluded that the glass to glass PV module with duct yields the highest electrical efficiency of 10.41%, and it also gives the highest outlet air temperature compared to other three configurations. Tiwari and Sodha 30 developed a thermal model of IPVTS system, which was experimentally researched by Huang et al. They derived an analytical expression for the PV module and the water. Furthermore, they carried out numerical computations for the climatic data and design parameters of the experimental IPVTS value. The thermal model introduced by them showed great agreement with the experimental value obtained by Huang et al.21 with clear increase in thermal efficiency of the IPVTS from 24% to 58% due to reduced temperature because of water flow.

 There have been a number of parameters highlighted that could affect the performance of PVT collectors. These parameters include glazing, water or air flow rate, absorber plates, and design types. The analyses of these parameters are as follows.

 Sopian et al.29 developed a glazed double pass PVT collector. For the collector built, the air first enters the upper flow channel (i.e., glass cover and PV panel). Next, the air flows to the back of the PV panel. The flow pattern is shown in Fig. 8. The work by Sopian et al.29 was further developed by Hegazy ,18 where he researched four different types of glazed PVT collectors, which consist of both single pass and double pass collectors (i.e., models I, II, III, and IV). Chow et al.10 conducted an experimental and numerical validation to determine the suitability of using a glazed or unglazed PVT system in the thermodynamical viewpoint. In their experiment, six different parameters were considered and evaluated for both glazed and unglazed conditions. They found that the glazed system gave better results when viewed from the energetic point if we are to maximize the quantity of either the thermal or the overall energy output, whereas from the exergy analysis, the unglazed gave better results. Increase in PV cell efficiency, packing factor, water mass to collector area ratio, and wind velocity is found favorable to go for an unglazed system, whereas the increase in on-site solar radiation and ambient temperature is favorable for a glazed system.

 Water or air flow rate, also known as mass flow rate, has great influence on the temperature decrement of PVT systems. It is known that PVT collectors can work with natural circulation or with forced circulation using mechanical device such as fan or pump. Tonui and Tripanagnostopoulos 31 investigated the effect of mass flow rate on the electrical and thermal efficiencies of theoretically validated PVT collector. They found that the PV temperature (TPV), back wall temperature (Tw), and the outlet air temperature (Tout) were reduced with increment in the air mass flow rate as more and more air volume exists to take more heat away from the channel wall, which consequently reduces the PV and back wall temperatures. The outlet air temperature is also reduced because of the increase in air velocity in the channel. Figure 9 shows the influence of mass flow rate on those temperatures. Kalogirou 22 conducted a simulation using the TRNSYS software to determine the ideal flow rate of the PVT system built, which uses monocrystalline PV cells. It was found that the optimum water flow was 25 l/h, which is equivalent to 0.007 kg/s for the 5.1 m2 collector area. He reported that the mean annual efficiency of the hybrid system was 7.7%, which is higher than a standard PV system of 2.8% efficiency. Furthermore, for the same type of PV cells considered (i.e., monocrystalline), it was reported that the improved electrical efficiency was 8.8%. Moreover, Hegazy 19 and Sopian et al.29 in researching the performance of PVT air heaters observed that the increase in the mass flow rate reduces the PV cell temperature and the outlet temperature and consequently raises the thermal and electrical efficiencies. It was also reported by Chow7 that as the mass flow rate in the tube increases from 0.02 to 0.016 kg/s for a 2 m2 PV collector area, the thermal and electrical efficiencies also increase (see Fig. 10). Cristofari et al.12 researched on the behavior of a copolymer PVT collector solar system in a low flow rate condition. They found that running in low flow conditions allows improving the global efficiency of the total solar system.

 Hegazy 19 included in his research a proposal to optimize the energy collection for solar air heaters (SAHs) by Hegazy. The optimization criteria used were applicable for the range of mass flow parameter (M) of1682≤M≤18 474,Moreover the optimized range (D/L)opt yielded3.36×10−3≤(D/L)opt≤1.85×10−3.He calculated that the channel-depth-to-length-of-absorber-plate (D/L) ratio required to maximize the energy collection rate from SAHs varies from 80% to 96%. The recommended value for the D/L ratio isD/L=2.5×10−3,the optimal for conventional SAHs developed, which operate with regard to variable airflow rates.

 Tripanagnostopoulos et al. presented a design aspect for hybrid PVT systems that use water as heat extraction fluid (PVT/water) for both glazed (GL) and unglazed (UNGL) types. They have analyzed the design concepts that focused on small-scale applications such as family houses, multiflat residential buildings, and small hotels. They found that the addition of the thermal unit produced good total energy output. Electrical and thermal efficiencies of the design concepts are shown in Table I. In their further analyses, they calculated that the PVT/water systems cost payback time was reduced by 2.5 times for pc-Si PV modules and 4.5 times for a-Si PV modules. The a-Si PV modules showed best results, which need only about 5 years. In their research, they suggested the use of a diffuse reflector to improve the electrical and thermal output of the system.
A literature review on available works, experiments, and analyses on water and air PVT collectors was presented. From the numerical models, it was found that the thermal efficiencies of the steady state model and the dynamical model differ by 0.2%. This showed that the dynamical effect could be neglected in the annual efficiency calculation. From the analytical models, it was shown that the addition of ducts could increase the electrical efficiency of PVT system. It was also shown that using water to cool the PVT system could increase the thermal efficiency from 24% to 58%. Glazed system gave better results when viewed from the energetic point of view if we are to maximize the quantity of either the thermal or the overall energy output. By exergy analysis, an increase in PV cell efficiency, packing factor, water mass to collector area ratio, and wind velocity is found favorable to go for an unglazed system. PV temperature (TPV), back wall temperature (Tw), and the outlet air temperature (Tout) were reduced with increment in the air mass flow rate as the volume exists to take more heat away from the channel wall, which consequently reduces the PV and back wall temperatures. The optimum PVT collector flow rate reported was 25 l/h, which is equivalent to 0.007 kg/s for the 5.1 m2 collector areas, which gave an annual efficiency of 7.7%. A value of optimum flow rate of 0. 02–0.016 kg/s was also reported. Thus, the uncertainties show that further studies on flow rate are necessary. PVT collectors can be further upgraded as reported in BIPVT collectors, which can be utilized in buildings. By considering the different designs of PVT collectors, the most suitable design that yields the best performance can be used, and thus, the performance of a PVT system can be further improved. From the literature review, it is obvious that PVT systems are very useful in the future. There are no substantial initiatives taken in order to reduce the cost and make PVT collectors favorable. It was also found that proper integration of PV collectors into buildings in which the PV is used to preheat the ventilation air could further improve the efficiency of the system. Eventually, extensive works should be taken to improve the overall efficiency of PVT collectors and also reduce their costs. Increasing the competitiveness of PVT collectors will enhance the utilization of renewable energy devices.