A pressure transmitting medium named Daphne 7474, which solidifies at Ps=3.7 GPa at room temperature, is presented. The value of Ps increases almost linearly with temperature up to 6.7 GPa at 100 °C. The high pressure realized by a medium at the liquid state allows a higher limit of pressurization, which assures an ideal hydrostatic pressure. We show a volume change against pressure, pressure reduction from room to liquid helium temperature in a clamped piston cylinder cell, pressure distribution and its standard deviation in a diamond anvil cell, and infrared properties, which might be useful for experimental applications.
Material properties under high pressures are nowadays fundamental information in solid state physics. Therefore, high pressure studies are getting more and more common in recent years. Among those, discoveries in the pressure range around 2–8 GPa are remarkable. Very recently, a pressure of 4 GPa gave rise to the superconducting Tc of iron-based LaO1−xFxFeAs, from 26 to 43 K. Organic conductors, such as (DI-DCNQI)2Ag (Refs. 2 and 3) and (MeDH-TTP)2AsF6,4 showed interesting critical behaviors around 2.2 GPa. CeNiGe3 shows a generic phase diagram between magnetism and superconductivity ,5 and CeIrSi3 shows high Hc2 properties with a relatively low pressure (∼2.5 GPa). Many of those works require extremely high-quality hydrostatic pressures. For example, effective masses and/or single temperature in Shubnikov–de Haas effect or de Haas–van Alphen effect is falsified under low-quality pressures. An indispensable condition for generating a high-quality hydrostatic pressure is that the pressure medium should be in a liquid state when the pressure around the sample is being changed (usually increased). When a piston cylinder made of BeCu is used, the maximum pressure without deformation inside is 1.5 GPa, below which the pressure cell can be used repeatedly, where BeCu denotes a heat-treated copper alloy with a small content of beryllium, which is used for the construction of high pressure devices. We have reported that Daphne 7373 solidifies at 2.2 GPa,7 and Flourinert 77/70 solidifies at 1.0 GPa. Therefore, the combination of a piston cylinder made of BeCu with the pressure medium of Daphne 7373 always provides a good quality of hydrostatic pressures, but not with Flourinert 77/70. However, recently developed pressure cells made of two layers of NiCrAl (inner layer)/BeCu (outer layer) (Ref. 8) or conventional maraging steel can generate a pressure of 4 GPa. With these technical advances in the mechanical strength in the piston cylinder cell techniques and with fruitful physics subjects, the requirement of a new pressure medium with a higher solidification pressure at room temperature comes up. It is known that the methanol/ethanol mixture remains liquid up to 10 GPa, but it seriously hampers studies that use conductive paste, such as silver or gold or carbon paste. Therefore, this mixture is not suitable for transport measurement. Furthermore, this mixture is known to have a large compressibility and is not favored even among those who are not dealing with transport study since a large room for compression should be reserved. When the pressure quality is poor, it is sometimes difficult to distinguish real coexistence of two phases from a simple mixture of two phases due to pressure distribution around the sample. This difficulty is likely to occur when the pressure region under discussion is beyond the solidification of the pressure medium. Since Daphne 7474 exhibits a high solidification pressure, this medium certainly extends the hydrostatic pressure region and thereby avoids such complexities. The purpose of the present paper is to show a new pressure medium that solidifies at 3.7 GPa. In addition to the solidification experiment, we demonstrate pressure distribution and its quality in diamond cells, compression data, pressure reduction from room to low temperatures in a clamped piston cylinder, as well as infrared properties.
SOLIDIFICATION PRESSURE OF PRESSURE
 We adopted three methods for the examination of the solidification pressure. One is to use a cubic anvil cell, the second one, a piston cylinder cell, and the third one, a diamond anvil cell (DAC).

 In the case of a cubic anvil cell, a strain gauge (KFRS-02-120-C1-13, Kyowa Electronic Instruments Co. Ltd. Tokyo, Japan) is placed inside a Teflon cell filled with pressure transmitting oil, whose solidification is being examined. The inner dimension of the Teflon cell is 1.5 mm in diameter and 2.2 mm in height and it is surrounded in pyrophyllite gasket, as shown in Fig. 1. The principle of the cubic anvil cell is as follows. A Teflon cell of 0.5 mm wall thickness filled with pressure transmitting oil is located at the center of the pyrophyllite cubic gasket. This cubic gasket is compressed from six sides isotropically by six anvils and is crashed at a pressure around 0.2 GPa. The crashed phyrophyllite works as an isotropic pressure transmitting powder to the Teflon cell. This process allows realization of a hydrostatic pressure. Pressure as a function of load force of the press is calibrated against the fixed points of Bi transitions, i.e., 2.55, 2.7, and 7.7 GPa, in a separate run. Figures 2(a)–2(c) show the resistance of a strain gauge (KFRS-02-120-C1-13, Kyowa Electronic Instruments Co. Ltd. Tokyo, Japan) immersed in Daphne 7474, Daphne 7373,7,9 and PES-1,10 respectively. As is seen in Figs. 2(a)–2(c), the resistance shows a clear kink at 3.7 GPa for Daphne 7474, 2.3 GPa for Daphne 7373, and 3.0 GPa for PES-1, respectively. Since the value of 2.3 GPa for Daphne 7373 agrees well with the previous result obtained with a piston cylinder cell ,7,9 we realize that the kink in strain gauge resistance represents the solidification of the medium. We speculate that the variation in the strain gauge resistance with pressure in the liquid reflects the shrinkage (strain) of the strain gauge itself by pressure, while that in the solid medium reflects the shrinkage (strain) of the solidified pressure medium. However, it is noted that in the actual measurement, such a kink in resistance is not observed in real stuff in the cubic anvil experiments. An example is shown in Fig. 3 for the resistance of a two dimensional organic conductor, κ-(MeDH-TTP)2AsF6.4

 We also examined the solidification pressure of Daphne 7474 using a piston cylinder cell made of heat-treated maraging steel. The method of examining the solidification pressure is the same as the previous one. That is, two strain gauges are located orienting in parallel and perpendicular to the axis of the piston cylinder, as shown in Fig. 4. When the pressure medium is in the liquid state, the resistance of the two strain gauges varies in the same way with pressure, while above the pressure of solidification of the medium, the resistance of the two strain gauges behaves differently. It is explained that before solidification, strain gauge shrinks as pressure increases, and after solidification, it shrinks only along the cylinder axis but much less along the perpendicular direction. In this experiment, pressure is calibrated against the fixed points of NH4F (I-II), NH4F (II-III), Bi (I-II), and Bi (II-III) transitions. Although, 3.6 GPa is an extrapolated value beyond the 2.7 GPa of the Bi (II-III) transition, it is very consistent with the value obtained in the cubic anvil experiment, which is also calibrated at 7.7 GPa of the Bi (III-IV) transition.
By use of a diamond anvil cell, and the temperature dependence of the solidification 
 We studied the solidification problem also by use of a DAC in Paris. This is the third method in this paper to deal with solidification and will be useful for those who are interested in experiment with DACs. As shown in Fig. 5, seven ruby spheres of ∼5 μm diameter were placed in a membrane driven DAC using a gasket hole of 150 μm filled with Daphne 7474. The position and width of the R1 fluorescence line were measured for each individual ruby at increasing pressures. Solidification of the liquid is detected by the onset of deviations in the pressure indicated by the different ruby spheres, as well as by the sudden increase in the width of the R1 line, similar to the technique described first by Piermarini et al. For this purpose, we evaluated the standard deviation of the pressure values indicated by the seven ruby spheres, which is seen to rise sharply at ∼4 GPa. This is the same pressure where also the widths tend to increase. Both the line positions and the width hence consistently indicate solidification at ∼4 GPa. Note that the standard deviation at 10 GPa is still only ∼0.35 GPa, i.e., 3.5%, which is indeed small given the fact that these conditions are deep in the stability field of the solid Daphne 7474. We extended our work to examine the solidification pressure Psol as a function of temperature in the same method. We made two experiments at isotherms, one at 50 °C and one at 100 °C. The first one gave a Psol of 5.0 GPa; the latter gave 6.7 GPa. The quality of the data is the same as in Fig. 5. Within uncertainty, Psol of Daphne 7474 increases linearly with temperature, i.e., at a rate of ∼0.037 GPa/K to reach 6.7 GPa at 100 °C.
PRESSURE DISTRIBUTION IN A 
 A precise pressure distribution in a DAC at room temperature is examined in Kobe independently of the measurement in Paris as shown for Daphne 7373 and Daphne 7474 using also ruby indicators, as shown in Fig. 6. The diameter of the sample space of the gasket is 250 μm and the diameter of the culet of the DAC is 600 μm. The length of the error bars is extremely narrow for P<5 GPa for Daphne 7474 and increases above 6 GPa, which is almost consistent with the solidification. These pressure dependences are consistent with the properties shown in Fig. 5. However, it is remarkable that even Daphne 7373 has narrow error bars up to similar pressures. In addition, the transverse pressure distribution in the wide range of 100 μm from the culet center is quite homogeneous even up to 10 GPa for Daphne 7474.
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES

Material
 Daphne 7474 is colorless and transparent and mainly consists of alkylsilane. Its specific weight is 0.8117 g/cm3 and its viscosity is 37.47 (extrapolated), 29.25, 4.373, and 1.604 mm2/s at −20, 20, 40, and 100 °C, respectively. On the other hand, PES-1 is a polyethylsiloxane. Daphne 7373 is a mixture of olefin oligomer ,15 whose specific weight is 0.819 g/cm3 and its viscosity is 559 (extrapolated), 422.0, 17.5, and 3.9 mm2/s at −20, 20, 40, and 100 °C, respectively. Comparing these two kinds of medium, Daphne 7474 is about 15–10 times less viscous than Daphne 7373 depending on temperature. Consequently, sealing against mechanical leak should be performed more carefully with Daphne 7474 than with Daphne 7373.
Pressure
 With the interest in the compressibility of the pressure medium, we examined the volume as a function of pressure. Simply speaking, the volume change is known by measuring the displacement of the piston of the piston cylinder. However, we have to take into account two factors; one is the compression of the Teflon, the volume of which is non-negligible compared to that of the medium, and the other is the initial mechanical tightening of the system. To correct the effect of Teflon compression, we measured the compression of the Teflon rod, which is shown in Fig. 7. Already in this experiment, correction of the initial mechanical tightening effect is necessary. We measured the displacement as a function of pressure, where the load of the ram is related to pressure, which is calibrated against fixed points of NH4F and Bi (I-II) transitions, in a separate run for Teflon measurement and in situ for the medium measurement. After displacement, μ (mm) is plotted against pressure P (GPa). dμ/dP versus P plot is performed. This derivative plot shows a distinct anomaly, which is the border between mechanical tightening and the real compression of the medium and Teflon. After this anomalous point is detected, it is natural to extrapolate the V versus P curve to P=0 naturally. This determines the V0, the initial volume at P=0. Then, the V versus P curve in full length is obtained. Once the compression property of Teflon is obtained, we can obtain the V versus P curve. The contribution of Teflon is treated assuming that the volume of Teflon and the medium is aligned in series, as shown in Fig. 8. Then using the compression data of Fig. 7 and with the correction of the initial mechanical tightening, we derived finally the V versus P curves of Daphne 7373, Daphne 7474, PES-1, and water (H2O), all of which were obtained in our laboratory. The purpose of showing the data for H2O is to demonstrate that our measurement and analysis are reasonably consistent with the old data of Bridgman.16
Pressure
 We have many inquiries on using a clamped cell for low temperature applications. It will be useful to note the example of pressure relations between room and low temperatures of Daphne 7474 and Daphne 7373. The absolute pressure calibration at room temperature becomes much more accurate than the previous measurement 9 because in the previous study, we used a BeCu cell, which allows only 1.5 GPa at maximum, with which the Bi calibration was not possible. In this study, we could interpolate the pressure of interest by using a Bi-fixed point with the development of a piston cylinder cell that achieves 4 GPa. A low temperature pressure is calibrated against the superconducting Tc of Pb, which is inductively detected. Then, pressure relations between room and low temperatures are shown in Fig. 9. It is seen that pressure reduction in Daphne 7474 with this design is slightly larger compared to that in Daphne 7373 but is relatively stable against the pressure at room temperature.
INFRARED 
 Infrared properties might be of interest for the readers. The optical transmittance in the infrared region of 60–10 000 cm−1 (0. 0074–1.24 eV) is investigated for Daphne 7474 and Daphne 7373 in Kobe. Both Daphne 7474 and Daphne 7373 show only simple absorption lines based on alkylsilane and hydrocarbon, arrowed in Fig. 10. Such good transmittance features in the extreme wide range from 60 cm−1 (far infrared) to 10 000 cm−1 (near infrared) demonstrate that Daphne 7474 and Daphne 7373 are the most promising pressure mediums for infrared experiments. Although the fine structure is additionally observed around 1000 cm−1 in the case of Daphne 7474, the absorption is weak and the optical spectrum can be obtained through the pressure medium.
We presented a new pressure transmitting medium named Daphne 7474, an alkylsilane, which solidifies at Ps=3.7 GPa at room temperature. This value is much higher than the previously obtained values of 2.3 GPa for Daphne 7373 and 3.0 GPa (our measurement) for PES-1. The high pressure realized by a medium at the liquid state allows a higher limit of pressurization, which assures an ideal hydrostatic pressure. If one needs higher pressures with high-quality hydrostaticity, one can refer to our result that Ps increases almost linearly with temperature up to 6.7 GPa at 100 °C. For designing pressure devices, we showed a volume change against pressure. For piston cylinder application, an example of pressure reduction from room to liquid helium temperature in a clamped piston cylinder cell is presented. With DAC, pressure distribution and its standard deviation were shown, which are also useful for other types of pressure devices. For infrared optical study, we examined the infrared transmittance.