We perform first-principles calculations of mechanical and electronic properties of silicene under strains. The in-plane stiffness of silicene is much smaller than that of graphene. The yielding strain of silicene under uniform expansion in the ideal conditions is about 20%. The homogeneous strain can introduce a semimetal-metal transition. The semimetal state of silicene, in which the Dirac cone locates at the Fermi level, can only persist up to tensile strain of 7% with nearly invariant Fermi velocity. For larger strains, silicene changes into a conventional metal. The work function is found to change significantly under biaxial strain. Our calculations show that strain tuning is important for applications of silicene in nanoelectronics.
Graphene, a two-dimensional honeycomb lattice of carbon atoms, has attracted great attentions due to its exceptional mechanical and electronic properties and potential applications. 1–5 Graphene is reported to be the strongest material ever to be measured ,3 and its charge carriers behave like massless Dirac fermions around the Fermi level (Ef) and have high mobility. As silicon being the element of IV family close to carbon, the silicon analogue of graphene, the so called silicene, also initiates considerable scientific interest. Theoretical calculations have shown that silicene favors a low-buckled honeycomb structure. The band structures of buckled structures of silicene have been investigated theoretically and found to exhibit linear dispersions crossing Ef at the Dirac points K and K′ of the hexagonal Brillouin zone, resembling that of graphene. Recently, the silicene structures have been obtained by chemical exfoliation ,10,11 and possible growth of silicene on Ag substrate has also been reported. Linear electronic dispersions of silicene nanoribbons 12 and sheets 15 are observed by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy. Furthermore, silicene has apparent additional advantage in integration into current Si-based electronics and thus has hopeful applications in nanoelectronics. Previous studies have shown that strain engineering can be an effective way of tuning the electronic properties of either bulk Si or one-dimensional Si nanowires 18–23 and is considered to be one of the most promising strategies for developing high-performance sub-10-nm silicon devices . 20 For example, strain can enhance the electron mobility and reduce the effective mass of the carriers of bulk Si and Si nanowires. 18–21 It can also tune the band gap and change the nature of the band gap from indirect to direct in Si nanowires . 22,23 As a novel two-dimensional form of Si, silicene shows encouraging advantages, like the Dirac fermion behavior, over traditional bulk Si, and strain can be introduced by the substrate, etc. It is therefore important to study the strain tuning effect on silicene. So far as we know, although properties of one-dimensional silicene nanoribbons have been studied theoretically in both elastic and plastic deformation region ,24,25 theoretical investigations of strain-modulated properties of two-dimensional silicene are mainly focused on the small strain range of elastic deformation. However, large strain may appear in practice and introduce novel modulations for silicene sheet. Thus systematic studies of mechanical and electronic properties of silicene sheet under large strain are necessary and timely for its applications in nanoelectronics. In this paper, we use the first-principles approach to study the mechanical and electronic properties of low-buckled two-dimensional silicene under the elastic strain. First the relevant elastic constants of silicene is investigated in the harmonic range of elastic deformation. Then uniform strain is applied on silicene. The strain increases until silicene undergoes a plastic deformation. The response of the mechanical and electronic properties to the strain is systematically studied. The low-buckled configuration of silicene is studied by using a periodical supercell model. A vacuum of at least 30 Å is applied to eliminate the interactions between adjacent silicene sheets. The first-principles calculations are performed within density-functional theory (DFT) implemented in the DMol3 package. The local density approximation (LDA) is employed for the exchange-correlation functional. All electron treatment and triple numerical plus polarization basis sets are applied for silicon atoms. A 12×12×1 Monkhorst-Pack k-point mesh 30 for the Brillouin zone sampling is used for the 1×1 hexagonal supercell which contains two silicon atoms, and this sampling is scaled according to the size of the supercells in our calculations. The structures are optimized until the maximum force allowed on each atom is less than 10-4 eV/ Å. We first optimize the geometric structure of the low-buckled silicene without strain. For the most energetically favored structure, the lattice constant, a0, buckling distance, d0, and Si-Si bond length (Figs. 1(a) and 1(b)) are 3.83, 0.42 and 2.25 Å, respectively, which are in good agreement with previous calculations . 8 The strain ɛ is defined as ɛ = (a-a0)/a0, where a is the lattice constant with strain. The mechanical properties can be revealed from the strain energy, Es = E(ɛ) − E(0); namely, the energy difference between systems under a given strain ɛ and no strain. Since silicene is a two-dimensional material which has an ambiguous definition of thickness, one can use the in-plane stiffness C instead of the Young's modulus to measure the strength. C = 1/A0(∂2ES/∂ε2), where A0 is the equilibrium area of the supercell. As a homogeneous and isotropic two-dimensional material, the elastic properties of silicene can be represented by the in-plane stiffness C and Poisson's ratio v. The Poisson's ratio can be straightforwardly defined as v = ɛtrans/ɛaxial, where ɛtrans and ɛaxial are the transverse and axial strain, respectively. A (1×2) rectangular supercell is constructed to calculate the elastic constants. Figure 1(c) shows the supercell used for the calculations. ax and ay are the lattice constants of the supercell in x and y directions, respectively, and varies with the strain values between +/- 0.015 to ensure they are in the harmonic region. For each grid point (ax, ay), the corresponding supercell is fully relaxed, and its strain energy is calculated (Fig. 1(d)). The strain energies for different grid points are then fitted to a quadratic polynomial expressed by $E_S = a_1 \varepsilon _x^2 + a_2 \varepsilon _y^2 + a_3 \varepsilon _x \varepsilon _y$ES=a1ɛx2+a2ɛy2+a3ɛxɛy, where ɛx and ɛy are strains along the x and y directions, respectively. It is found that a1 is almost equal to a2 due to isotropy in the honeycomb symmetry. The Poisson's ratio and in-plane stiffness can then be obtained as v = a3/a1, and $C = 1/A_0 ((2a_1 - a_3^2)/(2a_1))$C=1/A0((2a1−a32)/(2a1)). The calculated values of C and v of silicene are 63 J/m2 and 0.31, respectively, which are in good accord with previous theoretical results . 26 C and v of graphene were calculated to be 335 J/m2 and 0.16, respectively. It can be seen that the Poisson's ratio of silicene is about two times that of graphene, and the in-plane stiffness of silicene is 19% of that of graphene. Because the position of Si is below that of C in the periodic table, the Si-Si bond is longer than the C-C bond. In order to stabilize the honeycomb structure of Si, the structure puckers to form sp3-like orbitals, and the bonding between adjacent sp3-like orbitals which are perpendicular to the silicene sheet is much weaker than the π bond in graphene. Thus silicene is much less stiffer than graphene. Then large homogeneous strain ranging from −0.03 to 0.21 is applied to the system to investigate the response of mechanical and electronic properties. The symmetric hexagonal lattice is chosen to provide a Brillouin zone with well-defined high symmetry points, and a (4×4) hexagonal supercell is used in the following calculations. Strain dependency of Es and its derivative dEs/dɛ is shown in Figure 2. When the strain is sufficiently small, dEs/dɛ increases linearly with respect to the strain, which corresponds to the harmonic region. The harmonic range of silicene shows asymmetry for tensile strain and compressive strain and can be taken between −0.02 < ɛ < 0.04. Following the harmonic region, the system goes into the anharmonic region, in which the strain energy still increases with the increasing strain, but dEs/dɛ shows a nonlinear behavior with respect to the strain. At a critical strain, the strain energy has a sharp decrease. Meanwhile, the system changes to a different structure from the hexagonal structure irreversibly and goes into the plastic region. There are two critical points describing the instability of the structure (Fig. 2). One critical point, ɛC1, is the strain at which dEs/dɛ achieves its maximum value. For silicene under uniform expansion, ɛC1 is about 0.18, and corresponding Si-Si bond length is 2.62 Å. When ɛ > ɛC1, dEs/dɛ starts to decrease, which means less tension is required to expand the structure. Imaginary phonon frequencies are expected to appear for specific wave vectors of acoustic wave for ɛ larger than ɛC1, which implies that the structure can be unstable under certain acoustic waves. This phenomena is the so-called “phonon instability” and has been found in graphene 32 and graphane. The other critical point, ɛC2, is the yielding point. In our calculations, it is the strain at which the strain energy has the maximum value and then descents suddenly. ɛC2 of silicene under uniform expansion is about 0.20, and corresponding Si-Si bond length is 2.67 Å. When ɛ < ɛC2, the strain energy increases with the increasing strain, and the structure maintains the hexagonal structure. If the tension is released for ɛ < ɛC2, the system may restore the configuration without strain. It should be noted that our calculated value of ɛC2 corresponds to the system with perfect structure at zero temperature. ɛC2 can be reduced by various factors, such as appearance of defects and finite ambient temperature. Therefore, when ɛC1 < ɛ < ɛC2, the system is metastable and may experience plastic deformation due to specific wave perturbations, defects and ambient temperature. We further study the electronic structures of silicene under uniform expansion. Band structures of silicene under various strains are shown in Figures 3(a)–3(c). When no strain is applied, the π and π* bands cross at the K and K′ points at Ef and show linear energy dispersion relation around the Dirac points K and K′, which leads to a vanishing density of states (DOS) at Ef (Fig. 3(a)). This graphene-like massless Dirac fermion behavior of carriers of silicene agrees with earlier papers . 8,26 When the strain increases, the energy level of the s-like orbital at the Γ point ,8 EΓ, shifts down towards the Fermi level (Fig. 3(b)). The Dirac cone remains at the Fermi level for strains less than about 7% (Fig. 3(b)). For strains larger than about 7%, EΓ goes below Ef, while the Dirac cone shifts above Ef, which introduces a finite value of DOS at Ef (Fig. 3(c)). This semimetal-metal transition behavior of silicene under uniform expansion differs remarkably from graphene whose Dirac cone can keep at Ef even at uniform strains up to 15%. It is expected that there will be significant changes in the resistance at low bias voltages along with this transition. We also plot EΓ and the energy level of π* orbital at the K point, EK, as functions of the strain to show the transition explicitly (Fig. 3(d)). The π* orbital and the s-like antibonding orbital response quite differently to the strain. EK changes very slightly when the strain increases, while EΓ decreases rapidly with the increasing strain. The semimetal-metal transition occurs when EΓ = EK. Since a high Fermi velocity is very important for high-speed electronic devices, we also investigate the Fermi velocity vF of silicene in the semimetal state at various strains (Fig. 3(d)). The Fermi velocities can be obtained by fitting the π and π* bands near the Dirac point K with the expression E(q) = vFħ|q|, where q = k − K. For comparison, we also calculate the Fermi velocity of graphene without strain. The Fermi velocities of graphene and silicene without strain are 7.9×105 and 5.2×105 m/s, respectively, which indicates silicene can also be used in high-speed devices like graphene. The trend down the periodic table agrees with earlier calculations . 35,36 Our calculated value of vF of silicene without strain, v0, is in good agreement with Lew et al.'s result 35 and smaller than Cahangirov et al.'s result. Similar to graphene ,37 vF of silicene decreases slowly with the increasing strain. When strain increases up to 7%, vF only decreases to 94% of v0. Because the band lineup between silicene and other materials is important for its potential applications in nanoelectronics, we also explore the work function, Φ, of silicene under uniform strain. Work function of a material is the minimum energy needed for an electron of the material to escape into the vacuum and can be defined as Φ = Evac – Ef, where Evac is the potential energy at infinite distance away from the material. In our calculations, we average the electrostatic potential in the plane parallel to the silicene plane at different distances to the silicene plane, and a vacuum of 30 Å is large enough for the average electrostatic potential to flatten to a asymptotic value with the increasing distance to the silicene plane. Evac is determined as the asymptotic value of this average electrostatic potential energy, and then work function can be obtained by using its definition. The calculated work function of silicene without strain is about 4.8 eV. As shown in Figure 4, the work function increases monotonously by 0.32 eV when the strain increases up to 0.15. For larger strain, the work function nearly remains 5.12 eV and only decreases by 6 meV when the strain increases from 0.15 to 0.18. Thus strain engineering can be an effective way to control the band lineup in silicene-related contacts. In addition, the strain-tunable work function is also assumed to affect the charge transfer between gaseous molecules and silicene, and hence strain modulation can be used in silicene-based gas sensors. In conclusion, we calculate the elastic constants of silicene and find silicene is much less stiffer than graphene. Recently, strain calculations for one-dimensional armchair silicene nanoribbon which has 10 dimer bonds across the ribbon (ASNR(10)) have been performed by Topsakal et al. It is found that two-dimensional silicene sheet is more stiffer than ASNR(10), while yielding strain of silicene sheet is slightly smaller than that of ASNR(10) (The theoretical values 24 of in-plane stiffness and yielding strain for ASNR(10) is 51 J/m2 and 0.23, respectively). We also show that the semimetal nature of silicene can be destroyed by biaxial strain in the elastic range. Silicene undergoes the semimetal-metal transition at the strain of 7%, and the Fermi velocity changes very little before this critical strain. Thus only small strain could be applied on silicene if one wants to make use of the carriers of Dirac fermion behavior. The work function is found to first increase with the increasing strain and then nearly saturate. The strain tunable work function also makes silicene more competitive in applications of nanoelectronics.