In this study, we measured the cell temperature and methanol concentration dependences of direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC) performances and its polarization characteristics using a single cell with a Ag/Ag2SO4 reference electrode, which has been developed for the DMFC research in our laboratory. The membrane electrode assembly composed of carbon-supported Pt-Ru and Pt catalysts and the Nafion membrane was used for the measurements. As a result, the power densities obtained while feeding 1 and 5 mol dm−3 methanol solutions increase in the order of 26, 40, and 60 °C. For the 10 mol dm−3 methanol, the power density at 60 °C is lower than those at 26 and 40 °C. In these cases, the polarization curves to investigate the details of the relationship between the DMFC performance and temperature indicate that for the 1 and 5 mol dm−3 methanol, the current densities measured at the same anode and cathode potentials are enhanced with the increasing temperature. As for the 10 mol dm−3 methanol, the current densities at the anode and cathode decrease at 60 °C. To clarify a reason for the particular results of the 10 mol dm−3 methanol, the DMFC performances and the polarization curves at 40 and 60 °C were compared as a function of the methanol concentration. These results demonstrate that the decrease in the DMFC performance at 60 °C by feeding 10 mol dm−3 methanol is attributed to the simultaneous appearance of the O2 crossleak and methanol crossover causing the decline in the methanol oxidation performance at the anode and O2 reduction performance at the cathode.
Direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs) are a clean and efficient energy converter operating at low temperature such as around room temperature. In this system, methanol supplied to the anode is directly oxidized. Therefore, no reforming equipment is required, which leads to the realization of a small and compact DMFC system. Based on this feature, the DMFCs are expected to be used as power sources for portable electronic devices . 1 However, the DMFCs still have not been widely used because of their low power density. With regard to the reasons behind the low power density of the DMFCs, (1) a low methanol oxidation activity of the anode catalyst 2–4 and (2) a decline in the O2 reduction performance due to a methanol crossover 5 have been stated. For obtaining a high power density during the DMFC power generation, the cell temperature and methanol concentration are the important factors . 6 Thus, in order to produce DMFCs with a high power density, it is important to assess the effects of these factors on the anode and cathode characteristics. The methanol oxidation performance at the anode and the O2 reduction performance at the cathode are predicted to change during the power generation due to CO poisoning 3,7,8 and the methanol crossover. Consequently, the polarization characteristics at the anode and cathode should be simultaneously measured during the power generation. For these measurements, a DMFC single cell having a dynamic hydrogen electrode (DHE) used as the reference electrode is applied to simultaneously measure the cell voltages and the potential differences of the anode–reference and cathode–reference. The electrode potential of the DHE reflects the H2 oxidation/evolution reactions at the Pt. When a high concentration of methanol is fed to the anode of the single cell for a long time, some of the methanol reaches the Pt of the DHE. The methanol will be oxidized at the Pt, which influences the H2 oxidation/evolution reactions that determines the hydrogen electrode potential. Consequently, in order to correctly evaluate the anode and cathode characteristics, another reference electrode, which is not influenced by methanol, is required. Based on this information, we have previously developed a new DMFC single cell having a Ag/Ag2SO4 as the reference electrode, which is not influenced by methanol. As a result, the anode and cathode characteristics can be correctly measured during the DMFC power generation. By using this single cell, in this study, we first measured the cell temperature dependence of the DMFC performance while feeding 1, 5, and 10 mol dm−3 methanol solutions to the anode and humidified O2 gas to the cathode. Next, the details of the relationship between the cell temperature and the DMFC performance were investigated from the polarization curves at the anode and cathode measured during the power generation. Furthermore, the changes in the DMFC performances and its polarization characteristics were evaluated at 40 and 60 °C as a function of the methanol concentration. Based on these results, we assessed the cell temperature and methanol concentration dependences of the DMFC performance.
Preparation of membrane electrode
 The MEA (geometric electrode area, 5 cm2) used in this study was prepared as follows . 12,13 Nafion 117 (Dupont) was used as the polymer electrolyte membrane. The membrane (5 cm × 5 cm) was boiled in 0.5 mol dm−3 H2SO4 for 1 h and then washed twice by boiling in pure water for 1 h. Commercially available Pt/C (amount of deposited Pt: 45.9 wt. %, Tanaka Kikinzoku Kogyo) and Pt-Ru/C (amount of deposited Pt-Ru: 49.5 wt. %, Pt:Ru atomic ratio = 1:1, Tanaka Kikinzoku Kogyo) catalysts were used in the cathode and anode, respectively. The catalyst was dispersed using a ball mill in a 5 wt. % Nafion solution (Wako Pure Chemical Industries) diluted by a mixed solvent of methanol, 2-propanol, and Millipore water (1:1:1 weight ratio). The dispersed solution was spread on carbon paper (TGP-H-060H, Toray) over a 5 cm2 area. The amount of the spread Pt or Pt-Ru was adjusted to 1.0 mg cm−2. Subsequently, the pretreated Nafion 117 membrane was sandwiched between the two catalyst-coated carbon papers and then hot-pressed at 4.5 kN and 140 °C for 10 min.
Preparation of Ag /Ag2SO4 reference 
 A schematic illustration of a Ag/Ag2SO4 reference electrode to measure the anode and cathode characteristics during the DMFC operation is shown in the upper panel of Fig. 1. This reference electrode was prepared as follows. 13–16 The surface of a Ag wire (φ, 0.5 mm) was covered with Ag2SO4 by anodic polarization in 0.5 mol dm−3 H2SO4.15 A Pt wire of 0.3 mm diameter and 1 cm length was inserted inside the tip of the Pyrex glass tube for a liquid junction to the reference electrode. The tip of the glass tube was then heat-sealed. Finally, the glass tube for the reference electrode including the Ag wire, of which the surface was covered with Ag2SO4, was filled with a saturated K2SO4 aqueous solution.
Measurements of DMFC single cell performance and anode and cathode polarization
 The prepared MEA was installed in a single cell having a Ag/Ag2SO4 reference electrode for the measurements, as shown in the upper part of Fig. 1.12 The Ag/Ag2SO4 electrode was installed from the cathode side and placed in direct contact with the Nafion membrane. To measure the DMFC performances and the polarization curves, the single cell was connected to two electrometers (HE-104, Hokuto Denko) and an electrochemical instrument (Electronic Load PLZ164WA, Kikusui), and the data were collected using a data logger (GL200, Graphtec) (see the lower panel of Fig. 1). Prior to the measurements, the pre-operation for conditioning the MEA was carried out by feeding a 1 mol dm−3 methanol solution to the anode at 2 ml min−1 and fully humidified O2 gas to the cathode at 50 ml min−1. The cell temperature and the temperatures of the supplied methanol solution and the humidified O2 gas were adjusted to 26 °C. During the conditioning, the current was gradually increased at the rate of 0.02 A per 30 s until the cell voltage reached at 0.2 V in a galvanostatic mode by the electrochemical instrument. By repeating this procedure, the steady-state current–cell voltage (i-V) curve was obtained. The cell temperature was then increased to 40, 50, and 60 °C and the above procedure was conducted. In this case, the temperatures of the supplied methanol and O2 gas were the same as the cell temperature. Thus, the MEA-conditioning was accomplished. After the conditioning, the DMFC power generation was conducted at the cell temperatures of 26, 40, and 60 °C. During the power generation, the i-V, current–power (i-P), and current–potential (i-E) curves were measured by feeding a 1, 5, or 10 mol dm−3 methanol solution to the anode and the fully humidified O2 gas to the cathode at the same temperature as the cell temperature. The other measuring conditions were identical to those used for the MEA conditioning.
Temperature
 First, the DMFC performances were evaluated at the cell temperatures of 26, 40, and 60 °C. Figure 2 shows the i-V (upper) and i-P (lower) curves measured by feeding 1, 5, and 10 mol dm−3 methanol to the anode. In the case of 1 and 5 mol dm−3 methanol concentrations, the cell voltages are measured to the higher current density according to the increase in the temperature, as shown in Figs. ??? and ???. In these cases, from the i-P curves in Figs. ??? and ???, the power densities measured at the same current densities are found to increase with the increasing cell temperature. However, when we compare the i-P curves at the same temperatures in Figs. ??? and ???, the maximum power densities obtained for the 1 mol dm−3 methanol are greater than those for the 5 mol dm−3 methanol. As for the methanol concentration of 10 mol dm−3, from the i-V curves shown in Fig. ???, the cell voltages measured at the same current densities are found to increase with the increasing cell temperature from 26 to 40 °C. However, when the cell temperature is increased to 60 °C, the cell voltages measured at the same current densities significantly decrease when compared to those at 40 °C. This result is reflected in the relationship between the maximum power density and the cell temperature shown in Fig. ???. These results for the 10 mol dm−3 methanol concentration are different from those for the 1 and 5 mol dm−3 methanol concentrations.
Temperature dependence of anode and cathode
 Next, to clarify the reason why the temperature dependences of the DMFC performances observed in Fig. 2 are different, the temperature dependence of the anode and cathode characteristics measured during the power generation was evaluated. Before the evaluation, to know the effect of the temperature on the potential of the Ag/Ag2SO4 reference electrode introduced into the single cell, the potential differences between the Ag/Ag2SO4 electrode and a normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) were measured at 26, 40, and 60 °C in a 0.5 mol dm−3 H2SO4 solution. The obtained results are listed in Table I, which indicates that the Ag/Ag2SO4 electrode potentials at 26, 40, and 60 °C are estimated to be +0.736, +0.707, and +0.665 V vs. NHE, respectively. Subsequently, to confirm the accuracy of the i-E curves measurement by the single cell having the Ag/Ag2SO4 electrode, the i-V curve was calculated by subtracting the cathode and anode potentials of the same current density in the i-E curves measured at 26 °C by feeding the 10 mol dm−3 methanol. The obtained i-V curve is plotted as the black circles in Fig. 3. The white squares in the figure express the experimental result. When we look at Fig. 3, the two curves well agree, demonstrating that the Ag/Ag2SO4 electrode is not influenced even by the high concentration-methanol and an ohmic loss in the membrane is negligible. Based on the above results, the i-E curves were observed during the power generation by feeding the 1, 5, or 10 mol dm−3 methanol. Figure 4 shows the i-E curves measured at 26 (black symbols), 40 (blue symbols), and 60 °C (red symbols). In Fig. ???, which was measured during feeding 1 mol dm−3 methanol to the anode, the methanol oxidation curves expressed as the open symbols show that the current densities observed at the same electrode potentials increase in the order of 26, 40, and 60 °C. Moreover, when we look at the solid symbols corresponding to O2 reduction curves, the current densities measured at the same electrode potentials increase with the increasing cell temperature. These results indicate that both the methanol oxidation performance at the anode and the O2 reduction performance at the cathode are enhanced by increasing the cell temperature. The i-E curves measured while feeding 5 mol dm−3 methanol are shown in Fig. ???. In this figure, the methanol oxidation current densities measured at the same electrode potentials increase with the increasing cell temperature. The O2 reduction curves also indicate that the O2 reduction current densities at the same electrode potentials increase according to the increase in the temperature. These results demonstrate that the increased cell temperature enhances the methanol oxidation and O2 reduction performances. This result is similar to that for the 1 mol dm−3 methanol in Fig. ???. However, when we compare the O2 reduction curves observed at the same temperature in Figs. ??? and ???, the onset potentials of the O2 reduction for the 5 mol dm−3 methanol are more negative than those for 1 mol dm−3 methanol. This potential shift suggests that the increased methanol concentration increases the extent of the methanol crossover ,17 which reduces the O2 reduction performance at the cathode. For the 10 mol dm−3 methanol, from the i-E curves shown in Fig. ???, the methanol oxidation and O2 reduction current densities are found to be increased by increasing the cell temperature from 26 to 40 °C. However, when the cell temperature is increased to 60 °C, the methanol oxidation and O2 reduction current densities measured at the same electrode potentials are reduced, as compared to those at 40 °C. Furthermore, based on the O2 reduction curves, the negative shift in the onset potential of the O2 reduction is observed. These results indicate that for the 10 mol dm−3 methanol, the methanol oxidation and O2 reduction performances decline when the cell temperature is 60 °C. This result is different from those for the 1 and 5 mol dm−3 methanol concentrations.
Methanol concentration dependence of DMFC performances and its i-E
 The results in Figs. 2 and 4 indicate that the temperature dependence of the DMFC performance and its polarization characteristics for the 10 mol dm−3 methanol are different from those for the 1 and 5 mol dm−3 methanol concentrations. To clarify the factor causing the result as described above, the DMFC performances and its polarization characteristics at 40 and 60 °C were further compared. The results obtained at 40 °C are shown in the left panels of Fig. 5. In Fig. 5(a), the i-V curves, the cell voltages measured at the same current densities slightly decrease with the increasing methanol concentration. In this case, the i-P curves in Fig. 5(b) also indicate that the maximum power density decreases in the order of 1 > 5 ≥ 10 mol dm−3. These results imply that at 40 °C, the increased methanol concentration leads to a lower decline in the DMFC performance rather than an increase in the power density. The reason for this decline in the DMFC performance was considered from the i-E curves shown in Fig. 5(c). In the methanol oxidation curves expressed by the open symbols, the current densities measured at the same electrode potentials increase with the increasing methanol concentration, indicating an enhancement of the methanol oxidation performance at the anode. However, as explained in the results of Figs. 5(a) and 5(b), the DMFC performance declines by increasing the methanol concentration. Based on this result, any improvement in the methanol oxidation performance at the anode only slightly affects the DMFC performance. On the other hand, the solid symbols in Fig. 5(c) show that the O2 reduction curve shifts in the negative potential direction according to the increase in the methanol concentration. This result indicates that the O2 reduction performance at the cathode is decreased by the increased methanol crossover at the higher methanol concentration ,17 which is the main factor causing the decline of the DMFC performance shown in Figs. 5(a) and 5(b). The i-V and i-P curves measured at 60 °C are shown in Figs. 5(d) and 5(e), respectively. In Fig. 5(d), the i-V curves for the 1 mol dm−3 methanol show that the cell voltage reaches 0.2 V when the current density is ca. 210 mA cm−2. For the 5 mol dm−3 methanol, the current density at 0.2 V decreases to ca. 150 mA cm−2. As for the 10 mol dm−3 methanol, the current density at 0.2 V is 25 mA cm−2, which is 1/6 times that for the 5 mol dm−3 methanol. When we look at the i-P curves in Fig. 5(e), the decrease in the maximum power density is observed between the 1 and 5 mol dm−3 methanol concentrations. Furthermore, when the methanol concentration is increased from 5 to 10 mol dm−3, the obtained maximum power density drastically decreases. These results indicate that the DMFC performance at 60 °C decreases due to the increase in the methanol concentration; the extent of this decreasing effect is especially high for the 10 mol dm−3 methanol. The i-E curves used to explain the methanol concentration dependence of the DMFC performance at 60 °C are shown in Fig. 5(f). In this figure, the O2 reduction curve expressed as the solid symbols shifts in the negative potential direction with the increasing methanol concentration. The rate of the negative shift at 60 °C is greater than that at 40 °C in Fig. 5(c), suggesting that the methanol crossover occurs more easily at 60 °C. On the other hand, in the methanol oxidation curves denoted by the open symbols in Fig. 5(f), the current densities measured at the same electrode potentials are increased by the increasing methanol concentration from 1 to 5 mol dm−3. However, when the methanol concentration is increased from 5 to 10 mol dm−3, the measured current densities are drastically decreased. This result demonstrates that the methanol oxidation performance at the anode is significantly decreased by feeding the 10 mol dm−3 methanol. The reason for this result is considered as follows. For the Nafion 117 used in the MEA, the water uptake, which is concerned with the membrane-swelling, is known to increase with the increasing temperature. Therefore, the O2 permeability of the Nafion membrane enhances at the higher temperature ,19 because the water included in the membrane and its swelling affect the O2 permeation. This result implies that the O2 crossleak from the cathode to the anode during the DMFC operation 21 easily occurs at the high cell temperature. On the other hand, the Pt-Ru/C used as the anode catalyst has an O2 reduction activity as well as the high methanol oxidation activity. As shown in Fig. 5(f), the anode potential is sufficiently negative to the onset potential of the O2 reduction reaction. Based on these results, the methanol oxidation and the O2 reduction are expected to competitively occur at the Pt-Ru alloy during the DMFC power generation, resulting in the mixed electrode potential between the two reactions at the anode. This phenomenon leads to the decreased methanol oxidation performance of the Pt-Ru alloy at 60 °C. However, in Fig. 5(f), the decline of the anode performance is limited to the 10 mol dm−3 methanol. The Nafion 117 has been reported to greatly swell at the high methanol concentration. From this fact, it is considered that the O2 crossleak during the power generation is significantly enhanced by feeding the high concentration methanol, which particularly declines the anode characteristic for the 10 mol dm−3 methanol at 60 °C. Consequently, the decline in the methanol oxidation performance for the 10 mol dm−3 methanol shown in Fig. 5(f) is assumed to be attributed to the O2 crossleak from the cathode to the anode.
In this study, the DMFC power generation measurements were conducted between 26 and 60 °C by feeding the methanol solutions over a wide concentration range to the anode using a single cell containing a Ag/Ag2SO4 reference electrode. As a result, we succeeded in measuring the cell temperature and methanol concentration dependences of the DMFC performance and its polarization characteristics. The obtained results are listed as follows: 
 When a 1 or 5 mol dm−3 methanol is supplied to the anode, the DMFC performance enhances in the order of 26, 40, and 60 °C. Whereas, for the 10 mol dm−3 methanol, the DMFC performance obtained at 60 °C decreases, when compared to those at 26 and 40 °C.
 The i-E curves for the 1 and 5 mol dm−3 methanol concentrations measured during the DMFC power generation show that the anode and cathode characteristics are gradually improved by increasing the cell temperature from 26 to 40 and 60 °C. However, for the 10 mol dm−3 methanol, the anode and cathode performances obtained at 60 °C are lower than those at 26 and 40 °C.
 When the methanol concentration dependences of the DMFC performance and the polarization characteristics are compared between 40 and 60 °C, the significant decrease in the DMFC performance at 60 °C is observed for the 10 mol dm−3 methanol. This result is assumed to be attributed to the decreased O2 reduction performance at the cathode due to methanol crossover and the decreased methanol oxidation performance at the anode due to the O2 crossleak.