Recent discussions concerning the continuation of Moore's law have focused on announcements by several major corporations to transition from traditional 2D planar to new 3D multi-gate field effect transistor devices. However, the growth and progression of the semiconductor microelectronics industry over the previous 4 decades has been largely driven by combined advances in new materials, lithography, and materials related process technologies. Looking forward, it is therefore anticipated that new materials and materials technologies will continue to play a significant role in both the pursuit of Moore's law and the evolution of the industry. In this research update, we discuss and illustrate some of the required and anticipated materials innovations that could potentially lead to the continuation of Moore's law for another decade (or more). We focus primarily on the innovations needed to achieve single digit nanometer technologies and illustrate how at these dimensions not only new materials but new metrologies and computational modeling will be needed.
In a relentless pursuit of Moore's law,1 the silicon microelectronics industry has in the past decade quietly entered into the realm of the “nanometer” and ushered in a new era of products based on new nanoscale devices. This transition has been greatly aided by new materials and materials technologies such as strained Si,2 low-k dielectrics ,3 Cu damascene ,4 and high-k dielectrics 5 that have facilitated continued scaling and performance gains for micro/nano-electronic products. Similarly, the implementation of these new materials and technologies has benefited greatly from the availability of existing and newly invented metrologies for characterizing unique material properties 6 and computational modeling capabilities for predicting material and device behavior at nanometer dimensions . 7 As the semiconductor industry looks to advance into the single digit nanometer regime ,8 new materials, and material related technologies are again expected to play a key role. In particular, 1D and 2D “nanomaterials” such as Ge nanowires ,9 carbon nanotubes ,10 and graphene 11 are extremely attractive both due to their nanometer size and excellent electrical properties. Aside from their dimensions meeting the desired size requirement for future technologies, these and other nanomaterials are expected to also exhibit unique transport properties due to their dimensions approaching the length scales of electron and phonon scattering . 12 Hence, there is a need to both characterize and model the full electrical, optical, mechanical, and thermal property behavior of such nanoscale materials in order to harness their full potential. Unfortunately, the characterization of materials with nanometer dimensions presents numerous challenges to many of the metrologies the semiconductor industry has come to rely on. Measurements that are routine for bulk crystals and 100 nm thin films (such as characterizing electron-hole mobility and Young's modulus) are no longer straightforward and require either significant advancements in existing metrologies or the invention of all new metrologies . 13,14 Additionally, many of the new device types being discussed for the post CMOS era rely on new information storage mechanisms such as manipulating electron spin, oxidation state, etc., and require the invention of both new materials, metrologies, and computational models in order to achieve success. It is also anticipated that as device and interconnect structures approach single digit nanometer dimensions, interfacial properties, and effects will increase in significance and start to overcome the importance of “bulk” properties. Therefore, new metrologies sensitive exclusively to interfacial properties will additionally be needed. In this research update, we therefore highlight some of the key areas where significant advancements in new materials, metrology, and modeling (i.e. M3) are needed for the continuation of Moore's law into the single digit nanometer regime for both logic and memory devices and circuits. As we will show, the challenges are many and require advancements beyond just the transistor. Equally important to achieving single digit nanometer technologies will be addressing M3 needs in areas such as metal interconnects, lithography, and packaging. As the semiconductor industry annually details and publishes these needs in the International Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS),15 we will focus on a few key challenges in each of these areas that illustrate M3 needs across the full electrical, thermal, mechanical, and optical material property spectrum. Starting with continued scaling of traditional CMOS devices for logic applications, there is an intense search for a variety of new materials to enhance various components of the transistor (see Figure 1). One prime example would be insulating materials with a dielectric constant (k) significantly higher than the HfO2 based dielectric currently utilized as a high-k gate dielectric. Materials with increasingly higher k (such as GdHfO216 or LaGdO317) are required to increase gate capacitance and enable continued reductions in equivalent gate oxide thickness needed by traditional Dennard device scaling . 18,19 Additionally, semiconductors with high electron and hole mobility are being investigated to replace silicon as the transistor channel material. Such high mobility alternate channel materials are sought not only to facilitate scaling to smaller device dimensions, but also to potentially provide higher energy efficiency and power performance in future transistor technologies. The primary alternate channel materials under consideration include traditional high mobility semiconductors such as Ge, GaAs, and InGaAs.20 Unfortunately, combining these materials with Si process technology presents numerous material challenges 21 including the reduction of defects in Ge and III–V epilayers ,22 doping the device regions ,23 obtaining low interfacial defect densities with high-k gate dielectrics ,24,25 forming low resistivity metal contacts ,26 discovering new metal gate work function materials ,21 and compatibility and integration with low-k/Cu interconnect formation. Additional alternate CMOS channel materials include 1D and 2D analogues of Si,28,29 Ge,9,30 and III–V’s,31 carbon nanotubes ,10 graphene ,11,32 and novel 2D nanomaterials (i.e. MoS2, MoSe2, WS2)33,34 as well as heterostructures and superlattices of these materials . 35 In addition to increased mobility, such 1D and 2D materials offer the potential for ballistic transport devices. However, these 1D/2D materials pose similar problems to above as well as additional challenges related to their nanometer dimensions and unique aspect ratios. In this regard, the very property that makes them most interesting in some cases (i.e., mobility) also represents a significant challenge to characterize. While methods have been developed and established for characterizing the mobility of 2D materials, such as graphene ,36 the characterization of mobility in 1D nanowire materials still represents a significant challenge. Also, while the resistance of nanowires is relatively easy to measure, distinguishing the various materials parameters that contribute to resistance is still difficult. Furthermore, integrating materials such as graphene on different substrates and establishing a bandgap has proven extremely challenging to achieve without negatively impacting electron/hole mobility. So, metrology and modeling is needed to understand bandgap opening and to determine the sources of mobility degradation due to these materials and interface interactions. Due to the above challenges with continued CMOS device scaling, the semiconductor industry is additionally exploring materials that could facilitate information processing using alternate charge or non-charge based state variables . 39 Such “beyond CMOS” devices offer a potential path for continued device scaling and dramatic increases in energy efficiency as well as applications in both logic and memory products. A number of such “beyond CMOS” devices operate on the principle of information processing via the manipulation of an individual electron spin orientation or a collection of spins in a magnet. Beyond ferromagnetism, the operation of many of these devices depend on a variety of interesting magnetic, spin, and other phenomena such as magnetoresistance, magnetostriction, magnetoelectric coupling, spin torque, spin Hall, and Mott metal-insulator transitions. 40–45 Accordingly, a variety of new ferromagnetic, ferromagnetic semiconducting, mutliferroic, complex metal oxides, and strongly correlated electron (SCE) state materials are being considered whose nanoscale properties need to be characterized. Therefore, the implementation of such devices present numerous materials engineering challenges at the nanometer scale. The above spin based devices also present many new metrology and modeling challenges. Beyond the obvious needs to measure spin transport and lifetime in bulk and 2D multilayered/heterogeneous systems ,51,52 there is a more acute need for high resolution imaging techniques that are both compatible with magnetic materials and capable of atomic scale imaging of magnetic domains and interfaces . 53,54 Current commercial high resolution electron microscopes are challenged in this regard. Ideally, such imaging techniques would be multimodal to maximize information return from both magnetic and non-magnetic nanoscale objects and interfaces. As the operation and reliability physics of such spin based devices is still in a state of infancy, significant advancements in computational modeling are also needed to understand such problems as spin transport through materials ,52 scattering at interfaces ,55 tunneling through barrier layers ,56 dynamics of domain wall motion ,57 and spin injection from ferromagnetic to semiconductor materials . 58,59 For devices based on complex metal oxide and SCE materials, operation is based on the coupling between a variety of electric, magnetic, antiferromagnetic, ferroelectric, and magnetoelectric properties. However, these properties are all strongly affected by the presence and location of oxygen vacancies and cationic disorder. Metrologies and modeling are therefore needed to detect and characterize such point defects, their extended interactions, and correlate their resulting effects on the observed electric and magnetic behavior. This is particularly challenging for electron and ion based spectroscopy and imaging techniques that can have a tendency to alter the valence state of the metal cation. For memory applications, a still wider range of new devices are being considered that also operate on the manipulation of new materials properties that in addition to spin 40 include resistive switching ,63,64 electrochemical reduction and oxidation (redox) reactions ,65 and electromechanical actuation. Many of the materials envisioned for these devices involve new transition metal oxide, macromolecular, and molecular materials. 67–69 Memory devices based on resistive switching and redox reactions exhibit similar sensitivities to oxygen vacancies and cationic disorder as mentioned above, but are also dependent on the formation and elimination of conducting “filaments” that also require new metrologies to detect and modeling to understand. For macromolecular and molecular devices, significant M3 research is needed to understand electronic and/or ferroelectric properties, charge transport, contact resistances, and environmental/reliability degradation mechanisms . 68,69,71 All of the above new device technologies and material options must ultimately demonstrate the potential to enable high density devices and integrated products via compatibility with current lithographic technologies, interconnect fabrication processes, and packaging options. These three areas also face numerous materials challenges for the continued progression of Moore's law. Interconnects in particular have unique nanoscale electrical, thermal, and mechanical challenges. 72–74 Unlike CMOS Dennard device scaling in previous decades ,18 interconnect electrical performance actually degrades with dimensional scaling and can impose significant limitations on integrated circuit performance through critical path signal delay. As the magnitude of these delays are proportional to the resistance and capacitance of the interconnect circuit, new metal and dielectric materials are sought that, respectively, have reduced values of resistivity and dielectric constant relative to the current Cu and low-k dielectric materials employed (see Figure 1). The success of scaling resistance may lie in finding new materials, processes, and modeling methods that can help minimize grain boundary and surface/interface scattering . 75 In this regard, 2D and 1D materials such as graphene and carbon nanotubes are again of interest due to the possibility of achieving ballistic transport. The implementation of new materials with reduced dielectric constants, in contrast, depends on offsetting simultaneous reductions in thermal and mechanical properties 73 that can lead to die cracking during packaging and other reliability issues . 74 Success in this area would therefore be greatly aided by the development of new metrologies to enable the characterization and modeling of nanoscale thermal and mechanical structure-property relationships at atomic level detail. It is also important to note, that low-k dielectric materials are of interest for reducing parasitic capacitances associated with spacer and trench isolation in various 2D and 3D transistor devices . 8,80,81 For these applications, thermal and chemical stability during transistor fabrication represents an added challenge for candidate low-k materials. Recent interest in 3D interconnects and stacking multiple integrated circuits (die) in a single package also presents numerous material challenges and opportunities in the areas of die assembly and packaging. The impetus in this case is to enable increasingly smaller form factors for mobile markets, while simultaneously providing improved functionality and performance. However, the arising increased power density creates a variety of thermal related issues and new solder and polymeric packaging materials are needed to support the thermal hierarchy of chip assembly while simultaneously meeting mechanical stress, electrical performance, and heat dissipation reliability requirements . 82 For solders, lower melting point materials are needed to support multiple die attach operations and minimize thermally generated strains . 83 Nano-particle solders in particular appear to be one attractive option due to the reduced melting points they exhibit resulting from their increased surface/volume ratio. New polymeric materials that can meet similar requirements are also needed to serve as adhesives, molding compounds, and underfill and thermal interface materials. Here again nanomaterials such as CNTs and graphene are again expected to play a role by serving as additives in nano-composite materials to lower coefficients of thermal expansion, and improve thermal conductivity and mechanical properties . 85 The development of such nano-composite materials would be greatly aided by multiscale computational modeling . 86 All of the above is dependent on the ability to lithographically define single digit nanometer size patterns in photoresist materials and in turn transfer those patterns into the materials of interest. In this regard, discussions within the industry of the lithography roadmap have been largely dominated by the readiness and availability of extreme ultra-violet (EUV) lithography. The continuous slip in readiness of this technology has lead the industry to consider and adopt more expensive spacer defined double, triple, and even quadruple patterning schemes to enable 22 nm and below technologies . 88 The huge complexity and extreme costs of extending these approaches down to the single digit nm regime using current 193 nm immersion lithography 89 represents an immense opportunity for complementary or alternate approaches. Thin film deposition and etching techniques that are supremely selective to either metal or dielectrics is one capability that could greatly simplify such multiple patterning strategies . 90 However beyond cost and complexity, metrology techniques will also be needed to quickly image and non-destructively monitor the critical dimensions of these nanometer scale structures. The latter is a particular challenge given the sensitivity that polymeric and other materials can exhibit to the charge/current provided by electron beam based imaging techniques. While scanned probe microscopy (SPM) has shown some potential here ,91 neutral atom microscopy (NAM)92 is another technique that looks extremely promising and has shown the potential to achieve the resolution and throughput required. Such development of NAM techniques could also prove extremely beneficial to the imaging of low-k dielectrics and polymers in interconnect and packaging structures where electron beam sensitivity is also a concern. One intriguing materials related extension path for lithography is directed self assembly (DSA) of photoresist like polymeric materials . 94 DSA refers to the alignment of self assembled patterns with predictable shapes and dimensions within a lithographically predefined pattern of greater pitch. It relies on directed phase segregation of block co-polymer materials where the alignment of the self-assembled pattern is controlled by predefined chemical markers or structures that preferentially attract one of the polymers . 96 While significant progress has been made in demonstrating DSA in sparse patterns with domain sizes down to <5 nm,95,96 significant work still remains in improving line edge roughness ,96 and understanding etch contrast 97 and pattern transfer mechanisms . 98 However, one of the most serious challenges for DSA is measurement and control of pattern defect densities to <0.01 cm−2,99 and understanding the thermodynamic and process variables that control their formation. Since DSA films are extremely thin (∼ the thickness of the feature size) and defects can form beneath the surface, measurement of low defect densities over large areas is extremely challenging and new high throughput defect detection techniques are needed to enable progress. To assist with improving DSA, techniques are needed that can map surface energies and contact angles at the nanoscale and image and distinguish between different lamella in the segregated copolymer. For the former, chemical force SPM has shown some potential but needs continued development. The latter is more challenging due to the sensitivity of polymers to charge based imaging techniques and weak x-ray scattering due to the low electron density of carbon. Adoption of DSA will also ultimately require efficient models that can readily enable design of device components and circuit layout to be directly translated into DSA derived structures and ultimately predict device performance and defect formation. Focusing strictly on metrology, the recent transition to 3D transistor and interconnect structures implies the need for metrologies capable of measuring critical dimensions and detecting defects in 3D nanoscale features. Ideally, such metrologies would be non-destructive, provide real time characterization, and be capable of monitoring local variations in properties of nanoscale materials at the wafer level. In this regard, electron tomography techniques utilizing transmission electron microscopes have consistently demonstrated sub-nanometer 3D resolution capabilities but suffer from unreasonably long times for completion of analysis . 103,104 TEM and atomic resolution SPM techniques also exhibit significant coupling between the probe and sample that complicates their use for other nanoscale property measurements and will require significant research to develop methods for decoupling these interactions. X-ray scattering techniques in this regard may be more attractive, but can also suffer tradeoffs in terms of source brightness, measurement time, and resolution. Nanometer scale device structures also require the ability to measure and map elemental composition of dopants and impurities at the atomic level. TEM based electron loss spectroscopy (EELS) and atom probe tomography (APT) are the two leading techniques in this area but still require significant research and development. TEM-EELS in particular will be greatly aided by advances in aberration correction methods that will also help mitigate electron-beam damage, whereas APT would benefit from improved sample preparation techniques and image reconstruction algorithms . 107 Finally, conventional device scaling has benefited immensely from electrostatic and continuum modeling of various transistor and interconnect structures. As the semiconductor industry approaches single digit nm dimensions, atomic level knowledge of devices and materials will be required. In this regard, recent advances in modeling techniques now enable the representation of an entire 1D/2D/3D device with atomic resolution. It is anticipated that such capabilities will help provide fundamental insights into optimization of both materials and device structures . 108,109 However, effective use of computational material modeling to predict and simulate material and device behavior demands accurate knowledge of materials properties at the nanometer scale. In this regard, one of the most overlooked challenges in metrology is the need for valid nanoscale materials property values for use in computational models to extract material properties from complex, heterogeneous 3D structures. In summary, new materials, metrologies, and computational materials modeling (M3) are key to the continuation of Moore's law into the future and the achievement of more highly integrated, powerful, and world changing devices (see Table I). New nanoscale materials and materials processing technologies in particular may be needed both for continued dimensional scaling of traditional technologies as well as the realization of revolutionary device and interconnect structures with increased performance and/or power efficiency. In turn, improved metrologies and computational modeling tools are needed to guide the evolution and evaluate the performance and reliability of new nanoscale materials and device and interconnect architectures.