The current thin-film photovoltaic (PV) technologies are dominated by CdTe and Cu(In,Ga)Se2 compounds. However, due to the limited availably and toxicity of the elements in these technologies, the current research efforts are directed to search alternative earth abundant materials. Therefore, in this work, we analyze the CuSbS2 and CuBiS2 compounds as alternative absorber materials for future thin-film solar cells. Employing a first-principles approach within the density functional theory, we calculate the structural, electronic, and optical properties of CuSbS2 and CuBiS2 compounds. We show that these compounds have indirect fundamental band gap Eg ≈ 1. 5–1.7 eV. The indirect gap nature is different from the previous experimental measurements. However, due to the flat bands, the direct gap Egd ≈ 1. 6–1.8 eV is suitable for solar energy technologies. Furthermore, calculations reveal that these compounds have strong absorption coefficients, which are about twice as large as in other Cu-S based PV materials like CuInS2 and Cu2ZnSnS4. Therefore, CuSbS2 and CuBiS2 have the potential to be used as absorber materials in thin-film PV technologies.
Development of photovoltaic (PV) materials comprised of non-toxic and earth abundant elements is utmost criterion to meet the increasing demands for electricity production. The current thin-film PV technologies are mostly dominated by two promising compounds, i.e. CdTe and Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGS). However, due to the increasing cost (In, Ga), supply problem (In, Te), and environmental issues (Cd), these compounds are under question 4 in future PV technologies. Alternative quaternary Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) type compounds ,5,6 which contain abundant and inexpensive elements like Cu, Zn, Sn, S, and Se, are potential candidates for PV technologies. However, there are still challenges with this system related to the structural polymorphism and multivalence of Sn. It is, therefore, evident that more research is required to find the alternative inexpensive and earth abundant materials for efficient thin-film solar cells. Recently ,9 it has been reported that thin-film of CuSbS2 grown by thermal evaporation method has promising properties such as, a direct band gap energy Eg = 0. 91–1.89 eV and a strong absorption coefficient. In earlier studies, thin-films of CuSbS2 and CuBiS2 compounds grown by the various methods have also shown promising optical properties. 10–12 Despite these promising properties, thin-films based on these materials have not yet reached to the device level. Therefore, it is very essential to understand the fundamental physical properties of these CuMS2 (M = Sb and Bi) compounds which, however, are not yet well discussed. It is true that the further analyses of PV materials require a detailed understanding of its electronic and optical properties. Therefore, in this article, we systematically analyze the structural, electronic, and optical properties of CuMS2 compounds using first-principles method within density functional theory (DFT). A hybrid functional, which is known to accurately describe the lattice parameters, band gap energies, and total energy of the system, is used in present study. We find that CuMS2 compounds are indirect band gap semiconductors. The fundamental band gap energy is estimated to be Eg ≈ 1. 7–1.9 eV in CuSbS2 and Eg ≈ 1. 5–2.1 eV in CuBiS2. Furthermore, calculations reveal that these materials have strong optical absorption compared to well established CuInS2 (CIS) and Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS). The strong absorption in these compounds is explained by the localized p-like states of cation Sb/Bi in the conduction band (CB) region.
All the calculations are performed using the DFT employing the projector augmented wave method as implemented in Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP). We use both the semilocal Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE)15 exchange-correlation functional as well as the Heyd-Scuseria-Ernzerhof (HSE06)16 screened hybrid functional. In the latter method, we choose the standard range-separation parameter ω = 0.2 to decompose the Coulomb kernel, which is known to fairly describe the crystal volume and band gap energies. A plane wave cutoff energy of 400 eV and a 4 × 6 × 2 Monkhorst-Pack k-point mesh are used to give converged results. The lattice constants are fully relaxed within the HSE06 method, using a quasi-Newton algorithm by minimizing the total energy to an accuracy of 0.1 meV, and the ion positions were relaxed with an accuracy of 0.01 eV/Å for the forces on each atom. The valence electrons include the d and s orbitals for Cu, s and p orbitals for Sb, Bi, and S.
CuMS2 compounds crystallize in orthorhombic layered structure (Pnma; space group no. 62), which differs from currently dominated cubic and tetragonal semiconductors. Fig. 1 shows the crystal structure of CuMS2 compounds with the four formula units in a unit cell. A unit cell contains total 16 atoms (4 × CuMS2) with 4 Cu, 4 Sb/Bi, and 8 S atoms and all these atoms occupy the 4 c Wyckoff site. The cations Sb/Bi are four-coordinated and the Cu atoms are five-coordinated with respect to the neighboring anion S. The calculated lattice parameters (a, b, and c), enthalpy of formation (ΔHf), and band gap energy (Eg) are listed in Table I. It can be clearly seen that the lattice parameters agree well with the available experimental values and the use of the hybrid functional improves the reproduction of lattice parameters. We also calculate the enthalpy of formation of these compounds with the help of their elemental standard as per equation given below, 3μCu+μSb+ 3μS=ΔHf(CuSbS2)
and 3μCu+μBi+ 3μS=ΔHf(CuBiS2).
Here, ΔHf(CuSbS2) and ΔHf(CuBiS2) represent the formation energy of the compound CuSbS2 and CuBiS2, respectively, while μCu, μS, and μSb/Bi represent the chemical potential, i.e., total energy of the ground state solid atoms like fcc structured Cu, hexagonal structured S, and trigonal structured Sb and Bi, respectively. The enthalpy of formation for the above reaction is ΔHf  = −1.55 eV and −1.07 eV for CuSbS2 and CuBiS2, respectively (using HSE06 potential). The enthalpy of formation is one of the useful parameters to understand thermodynamic functions of any new materials which indeed are very crucial for device applications. One can see that the values are comparable to other Cu-S based compounds . 17 Hence, this suggests that also the CuSbS2 and CuBiS2 are thermodynamically stable.
Electronic 
 In this section, we discuss the electronic properties of CuMS2 compounds from both the electronic band structure and density of states (DOS) point of view. Fig. 2 shows the electronic band structure along the main symmetry directions for CuSbS2 and CuBiS2. Both these compounds show rather similar band structure except the location of the valence band (VB) maxima and CB minima. The VB maxima is located between the Γ-point and Z-point for both compounds, while CB minima is located between U–R and X–Γ regions for CuSbS2 (Fig. 2(a)) and CuBiS2 (Fig. 2(b)), respectively. These compounds have thus indirect gap, which is in contrast with the common perception of experimental measurements where a direct nature of band gap has been predicted. Our estimated fundamental band gap using HSE06 potential Eg ≈ 1.72 eV for CuSbS2 and Eg ≈ 1.58 eV for CuBiS2 are in good agreement with the available experimental 9–12 and theoretical studies . 18 On the other hand, estimated smallest direct band gap energies Egd ≈ 1.83 in CuSbS2 and Egd ≈ 1.69 eV in CuBiS2 are only ∼0.1 eV larger than the corresponding fundamental gap energies. Therefore, despite an indirect band gaps in CuMS2 compounds, the onset to optical absorption occurs at similar energy as the fundamental gap energy, and it is not surprising if experimental analysis suggests that the materials have a direct gap. There is discrepancy also in the experimental band gap values as it varies considerably (Table I). Generally, a parabolic band approximation 19 is used to determine the band gap energy from optical measurements and this approximation may lead to incorrect interpretation if the bands are non-parabolic. One can see from Fig. 2 that the topmost VB and the lowest CB have relatively flat dispersions and this could be the one reason for incorrect interpolation of experimental band gap. Second, one may also expect that the film growth conditions and the presence/absence of impurities or defects may lead to variation in the experimental band gap as such behaviors have been reported for CIGS compound. Moreover, the band gap of semiconductors is typically ∼0.2 eV smaller at room temperature than the zero-temperature values and also, the theoretical gap energy should be considered as an estimate, and we expect that HSE06 generates variation of ∼0.2 eV in band gap values. 21–24 In order to analyze the chemical bonding, Fig. 3 shows the atomic and angular resolved DOS of CuSbS2 (Fig. 3(a)) and CuBiS2 (Fig. 3(b)) compounds. It is clear that the DOS for these compounds are rather similar and overall features of the curves are same except the energy range and the shape of peaks. The VB of these compounds is mainly composed of Cu-3 d and S-3 p, similar to other Cu-S based semiconductors CIGS and CZTSSe. On the other hand, the CB is composed mainly of Sb/Bi-p states. The strong -p like states of trivalent cation, i.e. Sb-5 p or Bi-6 p, are very localized and this is the main reason that top of CB in CuMS2 compounds are much sharper compared to CIGS or CZTSSe compounds where it is more broaden.

 Optical properties play a very important role to understand materials suitability for solar cell applications. The study on the optical properties is here based on the absorption coefficient α(ω) and which is obtained directly from the dielectric function by 22–24,26 α(ω) = (2ω2/c)⋅[ε1(ω)2+ε2(ω)2−ε1(ω)]1/2, where c is the speed of light. Fig. 4(a) represents the calculated average polarization-independent absorption coefficients of CuMS2 compounds. Calculation reveals almost a similar optical absorption coefficient for both compounds except a strong absorption for CuBiS2 around 2.5 eV. Furthermore, absorption measurement (Fig. 4(a)) reveals an optical band gap energy Egopt ≈ 1. 6–1.8 eV for these compounds. Hence, our results suggest that further experimental and theory investigations are required to establish the exact value of the gap energy. The absorption coefficients for ħω = 2.5 eV are α(ω) = 0.5 × 105 cm−1 for CuSbS2 and α(ω) = 0.93 × 105 cm−1 for CuBiS2. The larger value for CuBiSe2 is due to a smaller band gap. We also calculate the absorption coefficient of established Cu-S based PV materials such as CIS and CZTS. For better comparison, we shift the energy scale by the respective band gap energies so that onset to absorption occurs at zero energy and are shown in Fig. 4(b). One can see from Fig. 4(b) that these CuMS2 compounds have strong absorption compared to CIS and CZTS. The absorption coefficient for ħω − Eg = 1 eV is α(ω) = 1.8 × 105 cm−1 for CuSbS2 and 1.5 × 105 for CuBiS2 cm−1, respectively. Hence, It shows that these compounds have comparable α(ω). On the other hand, the corresponding values for CIS and CZTS are 0.6 and 0.8 × 105 cm−1, respectively. Thus, the absorption coefficients of CuSbS2 and CuBiS2 compounds are about twice as large as in the conventional Cu-based PV materials. One reason for this is the flat dispersion of the CB (Fig. 2) and which is due to the localized p-like states of Sb and Bi in CB region (Fig. 3). Hence, it shows that the CuSbS2 and CuBiS2 can be regarded as potential absorber materials for inexpensive thin-film PV technologies.
The electronic and optical properties of CuSbS2 and CuBiS2 have been studied theoretically. It has been found that these materials have indirect band gap, which is in contrast to the experimental measurements (direct band gap). The fundamental band gap energy is estimated to be Eg ≈ 1. 5–1.7 eV. Furthermore, the difference between the fundamental gap and the lowest direct gap energy is only 0.1 eV. Therefore despite an indirect gap, one can expect a strong absorption in CuMS2 compounds and hence the direct gap energy Egd ≈ 1. 6–1.8 eV is suitable for solar energy technologies. Analysis shows that these compounds have much stronger absorption coefficients compared to other Cu-S based PV materials, which is a desire characteristic for any potential absorber material. Overall, these compounds have promising electronic and optical properties to be used as absorber material for solar cell applications.