Ambipolar organic semiconductors enable complementary-like circuits in organic electronics. Here we show promising electron and hole transport properties in the natural pigment Tyrian Purple (6,6’-dibromoindigo). X-ray diffraction of Tyrian Purple films reveals a highly-ordered structure with a single preferential orientation, attributed to intermolecular hydrogen bonding. This material, with a band gap of ∼1.8 eV, demonstrates high hole and electron mobilities of 0.22 cm2/V·s and 0.03 cm2/V·s in transistors, respectively; and air-stable operation. Inverters with gains of 250 in the first and third quadrant show the large potential of Tyrian Purple for the development of integrated organic electronic circuits.
Complementary circuits (CMOS), originally developed in silicon microelectronics, are the basis technology for integrated circuits, due to the wide noise margin, durability and low power dissipation achievable. In organic electronics, the fabrication of CMOS-like circuits with discrete p- and n-channel devices from the same semiconductor remains challenging . 2 Organic ambipolar semiconductors should have a small band gap supporting injection of electrons and holes from a single electrode material. Here we show that the natural pigment Tyrian Purple, 6,6’-dibromoindigo (figure 1(a)), is an ambipolar organic semiconductor with large electron and hole mobilities. Tyrian Purple forms highly ordered films with a single preferential orientation when prepared by evaporation. We have used such films to fabricate ambipolar organic field-effect transistors and inverters with high gain in the first and third quadrants. These devices exemplify the possibility of fabrication of high-performance biocompatible and biodegradable organic electronics . 3,4 One of the most prized dyes in antiquity, Tyrian Purple was originally produced from sea snails . 5,6 We prepared the dye synthetically via published procedures 7,8 and purified it twice by temperature gradient sublimation. Transistors were fabricated on glass substrates by first creating an AlOx dielectric layer electrochemically 9 (40 nm) on a vacuum-evaporated aluminum gate electrode (100 nm). Next, a 40 nm passivation layer of the oligoethylene tetratetracontane (C44H90, TTC) was evaporated onto the AlOx. Easily extracted from petroleum distillation, TTC is biodegradable and occurs abundantly in nature, being identified in large amounts (up to 10%) in medicinal plants 10–13 TTC-passivated AlOx slides were annealed at 60 oC for ∼12h under nitrogen ,14 giving a specific capacitance, C0d, of 43.2 nF·cm-2. Next, 80 nm of Tyrian Purple was evaporated from a hot-wall epitaxial source at a rate of 0.1 Å/s.15 Gold source and drain electrodes were evaporated through a shadow mask giving W/L of 1 mm / 80 μm. Similar to indigo, X-ray diffraction (XRD) of Tyrian Purple deposited on TTC showed only one diffraction peak (figure 1(b)) instead of a Debye ring characteristic of polycrystalline materials, suggesting a crystalline texture with a single preferential orientation. This high long-range order is also reflected in a large relative permittivity, ɛr. From impedance measurements of Al|dye|Al structures we calculated a value of ɛr = 6.2.17 Intermolecular hydrogen bonding between the carbonyl oxygens and amine hydrogen has been intensively characterized through X-ray diffraction 18,19 and other studies of indigoids . 20,21 Each Tyrian Purple molecule is nearly perfectly planar, with deviation from planarity of ∼ 5×10-12 m and is hydrogen bonded to four others, with an interplanar distance between two parallel molecules of 3.44 Å. Since the molecule alone has a low level of conjugation, two phenyl rings separated by an unconjugated bridge, we surmise that its highly-ordered growth resulting in intermolecular π-stacking is integral for charge transport. Cyclic voltammetry and UV-Vis measurements of Tyrian Purple thin films are shown in figures 1(c) and 1(d), respectively. On the basis of these we estimate a band gap of ∼1.8 eV, a HOMO level of -5.8 eV, and a LUMO level of -4.0 eV. Atomic-force microscopy (AFM) measurements of Tyrian Purple show the formation of crystalline needle-like grains with sizes in the 200-500 nm range. With the channel length used in these transistors, 80 μm, and grains of this size it is likely that overall mobility is limited by intergrain mobility. An AFM image of 80 nm of Tyrian Purple grown on TTC is shown in figure 2. Transfer and output characteristics of transistor devices are shown in figure 3(a)–3(c). In the first quadrant, the output characteristics of Tyrian Purple show a superlinear increase of current at low applied gate voltages due to the injection of electrons in a channel dominated by holes. Similarly, in the third quadrant the superlinear regime occurs for decreasingly negative gate voltages, because of the injection of holes. The electron and hole field-effect mobilities are calculated in the saturation regime, according to reported methods . 22 As shown in figure 3(a), the field effect mobilities are typically around 0.2 cm2/Vs for holes and 0.03 cm2/Vs for electrons. With a positive source-drain voltage, threshold gate voltages for holes are in the 1. 5 – 1.75 V range, while for electrons, 3V – 5V. On/Off ratios were 103 – 104 for both channels. Leakage current, Igs, as shown in figure 3(a), was in the picoamp range. We found that both hole and electron mobilities show little deterioration during measurement in air, even after repeated cycles (figure 3(d)). This is due to the relatively deep LUMO value of approx. -4 eV. Quasi-static transfer curves and corresponding voltage gains of complementary-like inverter circuits are shown at various VDD voltages in figures 4(a)–4(d). Gains of 255 in the first and 285 in the third quadrants are among the highest reported to-date for organic ambipolar devices . 2,24 These devices showed little hysteresis upon cycling . 17 In summary, we have found promising ambipolar transistor operation with the natural material Tyrian Purple. The performance of this material is compared with data on previously-reported ambipolar organic semiconductors in table I. Mobilities in Tyrian Purple are on-par with values reported in recent studies. The crystalline texture with single-preferential orientation, as evidenced by a single XRD peak, and a high dielectric constant (6.2) are interesting properties of this hydrogen-bonded semiconducting material. We fabricated devices featuring high mobilities and high voltage gains in complementary-like voltage inverters. We achieve low-voltage operation utilizing a gate dielectric of AlOx passivated with a naturally-occuring oligoethylene, tetratetracontane. This work demonstrates that high performance organic electronics can be fabricated from biomaterials.