We review the theory, fabrication, and implementation of the Josephson bifurcation amplifier (JBA). At the core of the JBA is a nonlinear oscillator based on a reactively shunted Josephson junction. A weak input signal to the amplifier couples to the junction critical current I0 and results in a dispersive shift in the resonator plasma frequency ωp. This shift is enhanced by biasing the junction with a sufficiently strong microwave current Irf to access the nonlinear regime where ωp varies with Irf. For a drive frequency ωd such that Ω=2Q(1−ωd/ωp)>3, the oscillator enters the bistable regime where two nondissipative dynamical states OL and OH, which differ in amplitude and phase, can exist. The sharp I0 dependent transition from OL to OH forms the basis for a sensitive digital threshold amplifier. In the vicinity of the bistable regime (Ω<3), analog amplification of continuous signals is also possible. We present experimental data characterizing amplifier performance and discuss two specific applications—the readout of superconducting qubits (digital mode) and dispersive microwave magnetometry (analog mode).
Electrical amplifiers are ubiquitous in experimental physics. They raise the energy of a signal coming from a measurement to a level sufficient to exceed the noise of the recording and processing electronics. Amplifiers are based on nonlinear elements such as the transistor for instance. Typically, such components are dissipative and exhibit a change in their dynamic two terminal resistance in response to an input signal applied to a third terminal, such as a gate. The superconducting tunnel junction 1 is a unique two terminal device that can be operated as either a nonlinear resistor or inductor. A number of different circuit elements, such as a superconducting island or loop, can serve as the third input terminal to couple an external signal, such as an electric charge or magnetic flux, respectively, to the properties of the junction, in particular the critical current I0. Small variations in I0 can significantly change the transport properties of the junction under appropriate bias conditions, giving rise to a sensitive amplifier with near quantum limited noise performance. Let us review the basic properties of Josephson tunnel junctions. A Josephson tunnel junction is formed by separating two superconducting electrodes with a barrier such as a thin oxide layer. The current I(t) and voltage V(t) of the junction can be expressed in terms of δ(t), the gauge-invariant phase difference, as I(t)=I0 sin δ(t) and V(t)=φ0dδ/dt, where the parameter I0 is the junction critical current and φ0=ℏ/2e is the reduced flux quantum. These equations parameterize a nonlinear inductor with inductance LJ=φ0/{I0 cos(δ)}, which for δ⪡1 or equivalently I(t)/I0⪡1 reduces to LJ0=φ0/I0. This inductance is by construction shunted in parallel by the geometric capacitance CJ of the junction, thereby forming an electrical oscillator. The dynamics of this oscillator can be described by the motion of a phase particle with coordinate δ in an anharmonic, sinusoidal potential U(δ)=−φ0I0 cos(δ). The natural frequency of small oscillations in this potential, the plasma frequency ,5,6 is ωp0=1/LJ0CJ. In general, due to the nonlinear nature of the Josephson inductance, the natural frequency of the oscillator will be a function of the oscillation amplitude. In a Josephson amplifier, an external signal typically modulates the critical current I0 of the junction, changing both the height of the sinusoidal potential ΔU and the plasma frequency ωp. Two measurement protocols to detect variations in I0 are illustrated in Fig. 1. In the dissipative approach (a), the height of the potential barrier ΔU(I0,Idc) is determined by biasing the junction with a current Idc≲I0 and detecting the onset of a finite resistance. In this scheme, the phase particle has sufficient energy to escape the potential well and the phase difference δ advances linearly in time, generating a finite dc voltage. Switching to the finite voltage state of the junction can be avoided by using a dispersive measurement technique to determine ωp(I0,Irf) as shown in Fig. 1(b). This involves applying an alternating current Irf sin(ωdt) and measuring the time varying voltage across the junction at the drive frequency ωd. If Irf⪡I0, the junction remains in the superconducting state, and the phase particle oscillates in only one well of the sinusoidal potential with no dc voltage generated. However, the amplitude and phase of the oscillating junction voltage V(t)=VJ cos(ωdt+ϕJ) vary with ωp(I0,Irf). The Josephson bifurcation amplifier (JBA) is a dispersive detector that exploits the anharmonicity of the junction oscillator for enhanced measurement sensitivity. In this oscillator, the plasma frequency ωp(I0,Irf) varies not only with the critical current I0 but also with the drive amplitude Irf. When biased with a sufficiently strong current Irf, the plasma frequency shift for a small modulation in I0 is significantly increased 9,11 as compared to the case with lower drive current when the oscillator is in the linear regime. The dependence of the plasma frequency on drive amplitude is depicted in Fig. 2 where the steady state amplitude VJ and the phase ϕJ of the junction voltage are plotted as a function of ωd and Irf (see Sec. II for theory). The resonant response sharpens and shifts to lower frequency as the drive amplitude is increased. At higher drive powers, the system bifurcates from a single valued to a bistable regime. When the drive frequency ωd (solid vertical line) is sufficiently detuned from the small oscillation plasma frequency ωp0, the system can have two possible oscillation states (OL and OH), which differ in amplitude and phase. The dashed lines on the response curves indicate unstable solutions. For a bias point such as the one indicated by the black dot in the figure, a small decrease in I0 will cause the oscillator to evolve from OL to OH, thus realizing a sensitive threshold detector for I0. The smallest variation in I0 that can be resolved is limited by thermal or quantum fluctuations, which broaden this transition. In this digital mode of operation, small changes in the critical current translate into changes in the occupation probability of the two dynamical states. The circuit schematic of the JBA is shown in Fig. 3. The tunnel junction is shunted in parallel by an additional purely reactive impedance Z(ω), which in the simplest case is a capacitor with CS⪢CJ. This reactive impedance allows one to tune the resonant frequency and the quality factor of the resonator. The junction can also be embedded in a transmission line cavity to form a nonlinear transmission line resonator. We will consider the capacitively shunted case in detail in this review though a brief description of the transmission line version will be provided in Sec. II. The input signal couples to the junction I0. Examples of input circuits used to couple weak electrical signals are shown in the inset. In (a), an external signal is inductively coupled to a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) loop, which modulates I0. In (b), a superconducting single electron transistor (S-SET) is used to couple signals capacitively. A microwave generator with Z0=50 Ω output impedance drives a current Irf(t)sin(ωdt) via the circulator (C), which allows microwave signals to flow in one direction. The signal reflected from the resonator is the amplifier output and is coupled to a cryogenic semiconductor amplifier through the adjacent port of the circulator. This signal is further amplified and demodulated at room temperature using quadrature mixers to determine the signal amplitude and phase. The idea of amplifying signals using a bifurcation is quite common and observed in electrical, optical, chemical, and biological systems (see Ref. 14 and references therein). Recently, such nonlinear behavior has been observed in nanomechanical resonators and is being extensively studied for applications in parametric sensing . 15 A biological example of bifurcation amplification in nature is the human ear. The cochlea in our ear is biased close to a Hopf bifurcation ,16 which leads to several remarkable properties in our hearing such as compression of dynamic range, infinitely sharp tuning at zero input, and generation of combination tones. The ear is essentially a nonlinear amplifier, i.e., the response depends quite strongly on the strength of the input signal. Researchers in robotics and medical sciences are currently in the process of constructing a hearing sensor, which can mimic the nonlinear properties of the cochlea. In superconducting devices, the Josephson parametric amplifier 18 also exploits proximity to a bifurcation. These devices are capable of achieving large gain with near quantum limited noise and can show quantum effects such as squeezing of noise below the standard quantum limit. Note that the JBA can also be operated as a conventional parametric amplifier by combining a weak input signal along with the drive signal. When biased in the vicinity of the bifurcation points, the system can exhibit parametric gain 20 like in recently developed amplifiers based on multi-junction (rather than single junction) circuits embedded in microwave cavities 21,22 In this review, we will detail the theory of operation of the JBA in Sec. II, focusing in particular on the case where the shunting impedance Z(ω) is a simple capacitor. In Sec. III, we discuss device design and fabrication. The cryogenic measurement setup is detailed in Sec. IV. In Sec. V, measurements characterizing the stand alone amplifier are presented. In Sec. VI, we discuss two particular applications of the JBA—measurements of the quantronium qubit and high speed magnetometry. We present concluding remarks in Sec. VII.
We study bifurcation amplification in two types of circuits. The first one is a lumped element resonator where we shunt the Josephson junction with a capacitor to form the nonlinear resonator. This circuit is shown in Fig. 4(a). Here, I0 is the critical current of the junction, CJ is the intrinsic junction capacitance, CS⪢CJ is the shunt capacitance to tune the resonant frequency, and R is the real part of the current source impedance, which provides damping. In the second technique, we embed a Josephson junction in a half-wave transmission line resonator as shown in Fig. 4(b). If we make a single mode approximation for the transmission line resonator near its resonant frequency, one arrives at the equivalent LCR circuit shown in Fig. 4(c). The values of the effective circuit elements are given by the following equationsVeff=Z0ω0CinVd,  Reff=Z02Rω02Cout2,Leff=πZ0/2ω0,  Ceff=2/(πZ0ω0),where Z0 is the characteristic impedance of the transmission line, Cin⪡Cout are the input and output coupling capacitors, ω0 is the bare resonant frequency of the cavity set by its length and speed of microwaves in the transmission line and R=50 Ω as before is the characteristic impedance of the microwave feed lines. The transmission line version, which has been dubbed the cavity bifurcation amplifier (CBA), essentially works on the same principle as the lumped element JBA though it offers some practical advantages such as ease of fabrication, absence of dielectric layers, possibility of multiplexing, etc. In this section, we will begin by establishing the connection between the JBA and the CBA, but we will restrict the detailed description to that of the JBA. For more details on the CBA, see Ref. 23. The classical differential equations describing the dynamics of a Josephson junction oscillator driven with a rf current for the circuits depicted in Figs. 4(a) and 4(c) are given below,CSφ0d2δ(t)dt2+φ0Rdδ(t)dt+I0 sin[δ(t)]=Irf cos(ωdt)+IN(t),(Leff+φ0I01−q̇2/I02)d2q(t)dt2+Reffdq(t)dt+qCeff=Vrf cos(ωdt)+VN(t).
In Eq. (2), δ is the gauge-invariant phase difference across the junction, ωd is the drive frequency, and φ0=ℏ/2e is the reduced flux quantum. The noise current IN(t) models the thermal noise of the source impedance R. In Eq. (3), q is the charge on the capacitor Ceff and VN(t) is the effective thermal noise of the impedance Reff. Under appropriate driving conditions, this nonlinear oscillator can have two steady driven states differing in amplitude and phase. Even though Eqs. (2) and (3) look different, especially with respect to the location of the nonlinear term, they reduce to the same effective equation. If we assume harmonic solutions for δ(t) or q(t) at the drive frequency ωd of the form y(t)eiωdt+c.c., we can show that the equation of motion for the dimensionless slowly varying complex amplitude u(τ) corresponding to Eqs. (2) and (3) can be reduced todudτ=−uΩ−iu(|u|2−1)−iβ+fN(τ),whereΩ=2Q(1−ωd/ωp0)
is the reduced drive detuning, ωp0 is the resonant frequency for small oscillations, Q is the quality factor, τ=(ωp0−ωd)t is the dimensionless slow time, β is the reduced drive power, and fN(τ) is the reduced noise term. Equation (4) has been derived under the rotating wave approximation with only leading order nonlinear terms being retained in Eqs. (2) and (3). The expressions for ωp0, Q, u, and β for the JBA and the CBA are given in Table I, where ε=(1+LeffI0/φ0)/Q. So apart from different expressions for the reduced variables in the terms of circuit parameters, the nonlinear dynamics of JBA and CBA oscillators converges to the universal form Eq. (4) for large Q. Hence, from now on, we will restrict our discussion to the JBA. The scaled steady state solutions of Eq. (4) (du/dτ=0) for the JBA are plotted in Fig. 2 for different excitation amplitude Irf. These curves are computed with the noise term fN(τ) set to zero. The different curves correspond to different drive strength. For Irf⪡I0, the response is linear with a characteristic Lorentzian line shape. In this regime, the phase particle only samples small values of δ so that the sinusoidal potential is well approximated by a parabola, which describes harmonic behavior. For increasing drive amplitude, the higher order nonlinear terms contribute and reduce the plasma frequency ωp(I0,Irf), but the response is still single valued. For sufficiently strong drive, the oscillator bifurcates and can occupy one of two metastable states (OL and OH). These states differ significantly in oscillation amplitude and phase. The dashed lines in Fig. 2 indicate the unstable solutions. To illustrate how a small variation in critical current can be detected, the phase response of the oscillator for two different values of I0 is plotted in Fig. 5 for three different drive currents corresponding to the linear response regime, the single-valued nonlinear regime, and the bifurcation regime described above. An input signal modulates the critical current and shifts the plasma frequency, shown in Fig. 5 as a displacement of the response curves. To operate the JBA, a drive current at fixed frequency ωd is applied. An alternative technique where the drive amplitude is kept fixed but the frequency is swept has been recently presented in Ref. 25. A shift in ωp is detected as a shift in phase of the reflected signal output, as described in Fig. 3. In the linear regime shown in Fig. 5(a), the maximum phase shift and thus the maximum gain are achieved by driving the oscillator at ωd=ωp0 as indicated by the solid line. Sensitivity can be improved by increasing the quality factor Q=RCsωp0 of the oscillator but at the direct cost of reducing the amplifier bandwidth. Another approach to improve sensitivity, which is at the heart of the JBA, is to increase the drive current to access the nonlinear regimes shown in Figs. 5(b) and 5(c). In Fig. 5(b), the phase response is sharper on the lower frequency part of the response curve, and a greater sensitivity can be obtained by driving at a frequency ωd red detuned from ωp0, as indicated by the dashed line. For yet stronger drives, the response curve transitions sharply between the two branches, as shown in Fig. 5(c). If the drive frequency ωd is chosen in the vicinity of this bifurcation point, then the oscillator will occupy one oscillation state or the other depending on the value of I0. By adjusting the drive current amplitude and frequency, the phase difference in the reflected signal between these states can approach 180°, realizing a very sensitive threshold detector for small variations in I0, which does not rely on switching to the dissipative finite voltage state. In the linear and the single-valued nonlinear regime, the minimum critical current variation that can be resolved and thus the ultimate sensitivity of the amplifier depend on the smallest phase or amplitude shift, analog quantities, that can be resolved by the cryogenic microwave measurement electronics in a given time interval. In the bifurcation regime, the reflected signal phase is a digital quantity with a sufficiently large difference between the two oscillation states that it can be fully resolved within practical integration times (∼100 ns). The amplifier sensitivity in the bifurcation regime is thus set by the minimal critical current variation, which causes the oscillator to switch from one dynamical state to the other. This is determined by the dominant fluctuations, thermal or quantum, in the system. Sensitivity is thus not limited by microwave electronics, an important practical advantage. For a given drive frequency ωd such that Ω=2RCS(ωp0−ωd)>3, the systems exhibits bistability within a certain range of drive amplitude such that IB−<Irf<IB+. Here IB− and IB+ are called the lower and upper bifurcation currents, respectively. Figure 6 shows a plot of the steady state solutions of Eq. (4) as a function of reduced drive power for different values of reduced drive detuning. Multivalued solutions exist only for Ω>3. The bifurcation points are the turning points of these curves where the slope d|u|2/dβ=∞. The reduced bifurcation points are indicated [βB±∝(IB±)2] for the curve with Ω=3.0. The saddle-node bifurcation is found in the vicinity of the upper bifurcation current IB+, which is given byIB+=1633I0α3/2(1+916Q2α2)1/2,where α=1−ωd/ωp0 is the dimensionless detuning of the drive. The above formula has been computed by retaining only one nonlinear term in the expansion of sin(δ) using the method outlined in Ref. 24 and is given here in the limit of high quality factor Q (≳10) such that Ω=2Qα⪢1. The JBA, when operated as a digital threshold detector, is biased near this point by ramping the current. Hence, in what follows, whenever we mention bifurcation point/current, we mean the upper bifurcation point/current. There are two important quantities that go into determining the sensitivity of the JBA to changes in critical current when operated as a digital threshold detector. The first quantity is the shift in the bifurcation current IB+ with critical current I0. This quantity can be written as follows:∂IB+∂I0=IB+I034α.
We can infer from the above equation that the fractional variation in the bifurcation current (∂IB+/IB+) is always larger than the fractional variation in critical current (∂I0/I0) since 3/4α>1. The second quantity that determines the sensitivity of the JBA is the intensity of fluctuations at a given temperature T. These fluctuations induce switching between the metastable states of the JBA, which gives a finite width to the transition from the low (OL) to the high (OH) amplitude state. In the classical regime (kBT⪢ℏωp0), this dynamical switching can be described by an Arrhenius law in which the rate of escape from an effective cubic metapotentialΓescrf=(ωa/2π)exp(−ΔUescrf/kBT)
is written as the product of an attempt frequency ωa/2π and a Boltzmann factor, which contains the barrier height ΔUescrf, and the system temperature T. In this case, the effective barrier height 24 isΔUescrf=Uescrf[1−(Irf/IB)2]3/2,Uescrf=6493φ0I0α,where the coefficient Uescrf is given to lowest order in 1/(αQ). Similarly, the attempt frequency in the metapotential is given byωa=ωa0[1−(Irf/IB)2]1/2,ωa0=4Qωpα2/(33),where we have assumed that the JBA is biased sufficiently close to the bifurcation point resulting in an overdamped motion in the rotating frame. We should point out that for bias points sufficiently far from the bifurcation point, the motion in the rotating frame is underdamped and Eq. (10a) has a different power law28 but Eq. (9a) remains valid. We now introduce the idea of a switching probability curve or an “S-curve.” If the JBA is biased by ramping the current Irf to a value slightly lower than IB+, there is a finite probability that it will make a transition from the low amplitude state to the high amplitude state in a given time tw. This is called the switching probability Pswitch at that bias point. Since we know the escape rate Γescrf from the low amplitude state to the high amplitude state of the JBA, we can define the probability of switching in a given time tw,Pswitch(Irf,I0,tw)=1−exp[−twΓescrf(Irf,I0)],where Pswitch(Irf,I0) has been defined as function of two parameters—the drive amplitude Irf and the critical current I0—as we are interested in the variation in Pswitch with respect to these two parameters. The S-curve is essentially the plot of Pswitch versus Irf for a given I0 and varies smoothly from zero to one (Fig. 7). The finite width of this S-curve is set by the intensity of fluctuations and hence the temperature. Clearly, a change in the value of critical current will shift the S-curve, resulting in a change in Pswitch. This is the principle of detection in the digital mode. The switching probability is measured by sending many pulses to the JBA and recording the resulting oscillation state of the JBA for each pulse. The shift in S-curves is essentially related to the shift in the bifurcation current and can be inferred from Eq. (7),ΔIshift=∂IB+∂I0ΔI0=IB+I034αΔI0.
The computation of the S-curve width is subtle. Since Eq. (8) (and hence Eq. (11)) is only valid for small escape rates (ΔUescrf≳kBT), it essentially breaks down near the top of the S-curve where the switching rates are very high. So we compute the width of the S-curve in terms of the drive amplitude using a different procedure. The upper boundary of the S-curve is clearly set by IB+ since the escape barrier vanishes at the bifurcation point. For the lower boundary we use the point when ΔUescrf∼kBT since Pswitch starts becoming nonzero around that point. The resulting width is given byΔIwidth=IB+(kBTUescrf)2/3,where Uescrf is given by Eq. (9b). Note that this definition of ΔIwidth is not strictly identical to that depicted in Fig. 7 where we qualitatively illustrate the idea of the width of an S-curve. We get a unit change in Pswitch when the shift in the S-curve is about the same as its width. Combining the above two equations, we can compute the change (ΔI0) in critical current that can be resolved in a single pulsed measurement or the critical current resolution asΔI0=32/34I01/3(kBTφ0)2/3α1/3(1−α)−2.
We note that the critical current resolution depends quite weakly on most parameters, the strongest being the temperature (T2/3). The dependence on I0 is quite weak (I01/3), which means that there is flexibility in choosing the value of junction critical current. If the total time taken for one pulsed measurement is tpulse (set by Q and noise temperature of the microwave amplification chain), then we can express the critical current resolution ΔI0 in terms of a critical current sensitivity per unit bandwidth asSI01/2=32/34I01/3(kBTφ0)2/3α1/3(1−α)−2tpulse.
An important point to be noted is that the above analysis has been done in the limit of large Q and small escape rates Γescrf in order to simplify calculations and see trends clearly. Often, many of these approximations become too crude in real experiments, especially for small Q<20, and the only way to obtain accurate predictions is with full numerical simulations of Eq. (2). Nevertheless, the above formulae serve as a guide to the phenomena and provide quick estimates. For more details on the calculation, see Ref. 20. Furthermore, we have neglected intrinsic fluctuations in the junction critical current as these have a well studied intensity and 1/f frequency spectrum 29 which diminishes their contribution at microwave frequencies. In the quantum regime kBT⪡ℏωp0, the above analysis remains valid if we replace T with an effective temperature Teff=ℏωd/2kB. This result has been predicted theoretically using the idea of quasienergies in the rotating frame for both underdamped 30,31 and overdamped motion in the rotating frame. Note that this effective temperature is different from the saturation temperature seen in the escape to the voltage state in a dc current-biased junction (T∗=ℏωd/7.2kB), which is determined by a tunneling rate at low temperatures . 33 One can also arrive at these results by treating the JBA as a parametric amplifier when biased near the bifurcation point. The parametric amplification process converts the virtual zero point quantum fluctuations into real classical fluctuations. The effective temperature of this classical bath tends to Teff=ℏωd/2kB as the bath temperature T→0. For operating points close to the bifurcation point, one can compute the full expression for the effective temperature 34 asTeff=ℏωd2kBcoth(ℏωd2kBT),and we note that this expression tends to the correct limits as T→0,∞. This expression is identical to the one obtained in Ref. 32, if we ignore effects of dephasing due to oscillator frequency modulation. This is justified since the only source of dephasing in JBA circuits would be due to 1/f fluctuations in the critical current of the junction or the dielectric constant of the capacitor, and they are quite small in the frequency range relevant for escape dynamics.
In this section we will briefly discuss the techniques for fabricating the JBA and some design considerations. In the first step, a metallic underlayer—either a normal metal (Au or Cu) or a superconductor (Nb)—is deposited on a silicon substrate to form one plate of the shunting capacitor. This is followed by deposition of a 200 nm insulating SiN layer by plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition at 400 °C. This layer is the dielectric material in the capacitor. Using e-beam lithography and double-angle shadow mask evaporation, we then fabricate the top capacitor plates along with a few square micron sized Al/AlOx/Al tunnel junction. The top capacitor plates along with the metallic underlayer form two capacitors in series. Figure 8 shows an optical image of the on-chip capacitor along with the schematic profile of the ground plane multilayer used for Cu based capacitors. The other metallic layers (Ti and Cr) were employed for protecting the Cu layer during the deposition of the dielectric layer. It also ensured that the Cu layer would adhere properly to the silicon substrate. For Au and Nb underlayers, SiN was directly deposited on top. Also shown in the bottom right corner is a scanning electron microscrope (SEM) image of a typical Josephson tunnel junction. The critical current of the junction was in the range of I0= 1–2 μA corresponding to a Josephson inductance in the range of LJ=0. 3–0.15 nH. By varying both the dielectric layer thickness and the pad area, the total shunt capacitance CS was varied between 16 and 40 pF. The plasma frequency of the JBA was kept in the range of 1–2 GHz. Several samples were fabricated and their parameters are listed in Table II. For more details on fabrication techniques, including the transmission line version of the JBA, see Ref. 23. We will now discuss some important design considerations to ensure that a well controlled bifurcation can be observed. In particular, we will discuss the microwave characteristics of the shunting capacitor, which reduces the bare plasma frequency of the Josephson junction. A more generalized discussion on the requirements of the shunting impedance for observing a bifurcation can be found in Ref. 12. The shunting capacitor has to be implemented carefully to ensure that it behaves as a capacitor at the relevant frequencies with minimal parasitic resistance and inductance. At higher frequencies (>5 GHz), it is much easier and practical to use distributed circuit elements such as transmission line resonators. This was one of the driving factors for the development of the CBA, which uses transmission line resonators with an embedded Josephson junction to implement the nonlinear oscillator. The first generation of our microwave capacitors were made using a thin (100 nm) Au ground plane. This was followed by Nb ground planes (50 and 200 nm) and then thick (1 μm) Cu. Imperfect screening currents in the capacitor plates due to the finite conductivity (Au and Cu) and thickness of the ground planes result in a stray inductance (LS) and a stray resistance (RS). Figure 8(b) depicts a model that accounts for the stray inductance and resistance. The samples made with superconducting Nb ground planes did not have any stray resistance, while the data for samples with Au and Cu ground planes lead to values of RS=0.8 and 0.02 Ω, respectively. The lowest parasitic inductance LS=0.026 nH was obtained with the 1 μm Cu ground planes, while the other samples had a value in the range of 0. 15–0.34 nH. The presence of stray resistance results in dissipation in the oscillator, and the phase shift in the reflected signal upon crossing the resonance is much less than the 360° expected for a lossless oscillator. In the high power regime, the samples with large stray resistance made a transition into a chaotic state before encountering the bistable regime. This chaotic state is also observed in well behaved samples at higher powers (black region in Fig. 13), but there is a large enough range of powers where the bistable regime is observed. The stray inductance has a similar effect as it increases the linearity of the oscillator, thereby pushing the onset of the nonlinear regime to higher drive powers and closer to the chaotic state. To summarize, the stray parameters LS and RS reduce and in the worst case eliminate the available phase space where one can observe the bistable regime of the nonlinear oscillator. For the JBA with Q∼20, one should aim to achieve LS/LJ<10 and RS/Z0<10−3 for optimum results.
The JBA chip is placed on a low-loss microwave circuit-board (εr=10) and is wire-bonded to the end of a coplanar stripline, which is soldered to a coaxial launcher affixed to the side wall of the copper sample box. We anchor the rf leak-tight sample box to the cold stage of a dilution refrigerator with base temperature of 15 mK. Some preliminary data were also obtained in a H3e cryostat with a base temperature of 270 mK. The measurement setup including the values of filters and attenuators is shown in Fig. 9. For frequency domain measurements, microwave excitation signals are generated by a HP 8722D vector network analyzer and are coupled to the sample via the −13 dB side port of a directional coupler after passing through cryogenic attenuators. The reflected microwave signal passes through the direct port of the coupler and is amplified first using a cryogenic 1. 20–1.85 GHz high electron mobility transistor (HEMT) amplifier with noise temperature TN=4 K before returning to the network analyzer. The isolators on the return line allow microwave signals to propagate only in one direction and suppress the HEMT amplifier input noise irradiating the sample by 60 dB. To suppress noise outside the band of the isolators (1. 20–1.85 GHz), we use lossy transmission line filters . 23,36 The attenuators on the input line carry out a similar function by reducing the noise from higher temperature stages. These components ensure that the intensity of the fluctuations at the sample correspond to the temperature of the cold stage to which it is anchored. This is important for maximizing the sensitivity of the JBA. For the time domain measurements, we used a Tektronix AWG 520 to create the pulse envelopes. These envelopes were combined with cw microwave signals from a synthesized microwave generator using analog mixers. The reflected signal was then mixed down to a lower frequency and digitized using a 1 GS/s digitizer from Acqiris. The phase was then determined by fitting this demodulated signal in software. Alternatively, we also used an Analog Devices phase detector (AD 8302) for directly converting the reflected signal phase into a voltage. This was the preferred method when the JBA was being used as a digital threshold detector and enabled rapid determination of the oscillation state with no software processing overhead. For ultralow noise, simultaneous dc and rf measurements on the same JBA sample, we developed a fully differential measurement scheme as shown in Fig. 10. I-V characteristic and low frequency switching current measurements 7 are often required to extract system parameters such as the critical current and the effective temperature. Nonequilibrium noise is effectively rejected in low frequency measurements by using twisted-pair cables with fully differential signals. Radio frequency signals on the other hand are traditionally single ended and are susceptible to common mode noise when combining low and high frequency measurements. To remedy this problem, we used a 180° hybrid coupler to create two out of phase rf signals, which were then combined with the dc signals using two bias tees to create a fully differential excitation. This setup was used only for ultralow noise measurements such as the escape temperature measurements in the JBA described at the end of Sec. V B.
Frequency domain measurements are used to characterize the nonlinear oscillator and extract circuit parameters. The linear plasma resonance is located by sweeping the excitation frequency ωd and measuring the reflection coefficient ΓR(ωd)=[Z(ωd)−Z0]/[Z(ωd)+Z0]. Here Z0=50 Ω is the characteristic impedance of our transmission lines, and Z(ωd) is the impedance seen at the sample holder plane. For an ideal LC resonator without intrinsic dissipation, we expect a phase shift Δϕ=ϕωd⪢ωp0−ϕωd⪡ωp0=2π. The excitation power was kept low enough to access the linear regime of the oscillator. In Fig. 11, we present the reflected signal phase ϕ as a function of excitation frequency for sample 5. The point where ϕ=0 is the linear-regime plasma frequency. For sample 5, ωp0/2π=1.54 GHz. The precise frequency and critical current dependence of the reflected signal phase of our samples can be explained by the lumped element model shown in Fig. 8(b). The plasma frequency in the linear regime is determined by the total inductance LJ+LS and capacitance CS and is given by the following relation:(1ωp0)2=CS(LJ+LS)=φ0CSI0+CSLS.
A plot of (2π/ωp0)2 versus 1/I0=LJ/φ0 is shown in Fig. 12 for samples 1, 2, 4, and 5. As the critical current is decreased by applying a magnetic field in the plane of the junction, its inductance increases, and the plasma frequency is reduced. For each sample, a linear fit to the data of Fig. 12 yields the values of CS and LS (see Table II). The fit values for CS agree well with simple estimates made from the sample geometry. For samples with a thin underlayer ( 1–3), a stray inductance in the range LS=0. 20–0.34 nH was observed. For samples 4 and 5 with a significantly thicker underlayer, LS was reduced to 0.026 and 0.15 nH, respectively. This behavior is consistent with the calculated screening properties of our thin films. Using LS and CS we can accurately predict the observed resonant line shape (solid line) in Fig. 11 in which RS∼0. Samples with a normal underlayer yielded finite values of RS. We now discuss measurements of the power dependence of the plasma resonance. The reflected signal phase as a function of frequency for increasing power for sample 5 is presented in the lower panel of Fig. 13 as a two dimensional color plot. Each row is a single frequency sweep, similar to Fig. 11. For small excitation power, we recover the linear plasma resonance at 1.54 GHz, indicated in yellow, corresponding to ϕ=0. As the incident power is increased beyond −115 dBm, the plasma frequency decreases as explained in Sec. II. For powers greater than −105 dBm, there is an abrupt transition from the phase leading (green) to phase lagging (red) state. This marks the transition from the low amplitude state to the high amplitude state. One can cross this transition by sweeping the power at fixed frequency also (dashed line). For powers in excess of −90 dBm, we encounter a new dynamical regime (black region in Fig. 13) where δ appears to diffuse between the wells of the cosine potential. This was confirmed by the presence of an unambiguous audio frequency ac resistance in the black region (see Ref. 20). In the lower panel of Fig. 13 (inset), we illustrate the sequence of dynamical transitions by plotting ϕ as a function of incident power at ωd/2π=1.375 GHz. For P<−102 dBm, the phase is independent of power and δ oscillates in a single well in the harmonic-like phase leading state (letter A). For −102 dBm<P<−90 dBm, the phase evolves with power and δ still remains within the same well but oscillates in the anharmonic phase lagging state (letter B). Finally, for P>−90 dBm, the average phase of the reflected signal saturates to −180°, corresponding to a capacitive short circuit. This last value is expected if δ hops randomly between wells, the effect of which is to neutralize the Josephson inductance. To explain the complete frequency and power dependence of the transitions shown in the lower panel of Fig. 13, we numerically solved the full circuit model shown in Fig. 8(b), including the exact sinusoidal junction current-phase relation. The result of this calculation is shown in the upper panel of Fig. 13. It correctly predicts the variation in the plasma frequency with excitation power and the boundaries of the phase diffusion region. The agreement between theory and experiment is remarkable in view of the simplicity of this model, which uses only measured parameters.

 The measurements described so far characterized the time averaged response of the Josephson oscillator under continuous microwave excitation. We will now describe the experiments that probed the dynamics of the JBA at short time scales (∼10 ns) under pulsed microwave excitation. Data from sample 6 are presented in this section. We first characterized in detail the switching associated with the OL→OH transition near the bifurcation point IB+. We excited the oscillator with two different readout pulse protocols. In the first protocol, the drive current was ramped from zero to its maximum value in 40 ns and was then held constant for 40 ns before returning to zero. Only the final 20 ns of the constant drive period were used to determine the oscillation phase ϕ with the first 20 ns allotted for settling of the phase. Histograms taken with a 10 MHz acquisition rate are shown in Fig. 14. In the upper panel, the two peaks corresponding to states OL and OH can be easily resolved with a small overlap of 10−2. The finite width of each peak is due to the output noise and is consistent with the system noise temperature of our microwave electronics. In this first method, the latching property of the system has not been exploited. In the second protocol for the readout pulse, we again ramp for 40 ns and allow a settling time of 20 ns, but we then reduce the drive current by 20% and measure the reflected signal for 300 ns. In that latter period, whatever state was reached at the end of the initial 60 ns period is “latched” and this time is used to improve the signal/noise ratio of the reflected phase measurement. As shown in the lower panel of Fig. 14, the two peaks are now fully separated, with an overlap of 6×10−5, allowing a determination of the state OH probability with an accuracy better than 10−3. This second protocol is well suited to precise time-resolved measurements of I0 or for applications where a low noise follower amplifier is unavailable. At the end of the pulse, the amplitude is ramped back to zero in 10–20 ns. The ramp up and ramp down times depend on the quality factor of the resonator, and we ensure that this process is adiabatic and there is no ringing in the oscillator. This entire process can be repeated almost immediately since there is no heating due to the absence of on-chip dissipation leading to very fast repetition rates (≲10 MHz). We then measured the switching probability curves or S-curves, Pswitch(Irf), for different values of I0 to evaluate the sensitivity of the JBA. Using the readout protocol and the discrimination threshold shown in Fig. 14, we obtain the switching probability curves shown in Fig. 15. Defining the discrimination power ηd as the maximum difference between two S-curves, which differ in I0, we find that at T=280 mK, ηd=57% for ΔI0/I0=1%. The switching probability curves should shift according to (ΔIB/IB)/(ΔI0/I0)=3/4α [Eq. (7)], which for our case takes the value of 6.1. In Fig. 15, the curves are shifted by 6%, which agrees well with this prediction. As discussed in Sec. II, the width of the S-curves depends on the effective intensity of fluctuations in the JBA oscillator. A well designed experimental setup will ensure that this intensity of fluctuations is set by the thermal/quantum fluctuations corresponding to the operating temperature of the JBA. It is possible to determine the effective temperature characterizing these fluctuations by measuring the escape rate from state OL to OH as a function of the various bias parameters. The classical theory of escape was briefly described in Sec. II. In the quantum regime T⪡ℏωp0/kB, the effective intensity of fluctuations is given by setting T=Teff=ℏωp0/2kB. The full expression for the escape temperature 34 is given by Eq. (16). We will now describe the procedure for measuring the escape rate from the low amplitude state of the JBA. The JBA was biased with a long trapezoidal pulse at frequency ωd with amplitude Irf. The pulse ramp time used was 40 ns. The total pulse length was 1 ms. The phase of the reflected pulse is analyzed and the time (τiswitch) at which the JBA makes a transition from low to high amplitude state is recorded. The experiment is repeated typically for N=105 times. We then construct the probability PL(τ) of the JBA being the low amplitude state asPL(τ)=1−1NΣi=1NΘ(τ−τiswitch),where
Θ(τ)=0  τ<0=1  τ≥0is the Heaviside unit step function. The probability PL(τ) decays exponentially with a decay constant given by the escape rate Γescrf,PL(τ)=exp(−Γescrfτ).
So by fitting an exponential to PL(τ), we can determine Γescrf(Irf) for different bias amplitudes Irf. The results are shown in Fig. 16 where we have plotted the reduced escape rate Γ̃escrf(Irf)=[log(ωa/2πΓescrf)]2/3 given byΓ̃escrf(Irf)=(UescrfkBTescrf)2/3(1−Irf2IB2)
as a function of Ief2/IB2 for selected values of bath temperatures. Data are shown for two samples with different resonant frequencies in panels (a) and (b). We observe straight lines with different slopes for different bath temperatures. The slope Γ̃slope and intercept Γ̃int of the line are given byΓ̃slope=−(UescrfkBTescrf)2/31IB2,Γ̃int=(UescrfkBTescrf)2/3.
From these two quantities we can determine the bifurcation current IB and escape temperature Tescrf using the following formulae:IB=(−Γ̃int/Γ̃slope)1/2,Tescrf=UescrfkBΓ̃int3/2.
This confirms that the escape rate follows the behavior given by Eqs. (8) and (9). We can then extract the escape temperature Tescrf for each operating point. Note that in the experiment, we control Irf by varying the pulse amplitude (Arf) of the rf generator. Since Irf∝Arf, we can plot Γ̃escrf as a function of Arf2 and extract the bifurcation amplitude (AB∝IB) using Eq. (23a). Once we have AB we can plot the data as a function of Arf2/AB2, which is the same as Irf2/IB2. When plotted this way, the straight lines should intersect Γ̃escrf=0 at Irf2/IB2=1 at all temperatures since the bifurcation current IB (and hence AB) does not depend on temperature. The data for each temperature in Fig. 16 have been plotted after normalizing the x-axis with the value of IB (AB) extracted at the lowest temperature. In practice, we always observe small differences in the extracted values of AB at different temperatures as is evident from the data. This could imply that the data start to deviate from the prediction of Eq. (8). However we found that this variation was predominantly due to the slow increase in the attenuation of the input coaxial lines due to slowly decreasing levels of liquid Helium in the dewar of the dilution refrigerator. We observed that the extracted values of AB always increased with time even when the temperature was kept constant and reverts back when the liquid helium level is restored. The data shown in Fig. 16 take about 2 days to acquire since one has to wait for the system to thermalize at each operating temperature. During such long periods, the liquid helium level can change appreciably. We also verified that the extracted values of AB remained constant when noise was added to the system to artificially elevate the temperature. All these checks were done to ensure that our experiment follows the prediction of Eq. (8) and we can extract meaningful results for the value of Tescrf. In order to extract Tescrf from the data, we need the value of Uescrf. Data from numerical simulations of the JBA circuit yielded a value for Uescrf which was 10%–20% larger than those obtained from Eq. (9b). This would lead to a 10%–20% smaller value for Tescrf, and we observed this discrepancy in the experiments. In order to overcome this problem, we used the following procedure to extract Uescrf from the data itself. At the highest temperature point, we assumed Tescrf=T since that is the expected result in the classical regime. We can then use Eq. (23b) to extract Uescrf=kBTescrfΓ̃int3/2. This extracted value of Uescrf is then used for all the lower temperature points. This is valid provided we can ensure that the intensity of fluctuations in the JBA really correspond to the thermal fluctuations at that temperature. We verified this by biasing the junction with a dc current and measuring the escape rate from the superconducting to the normal state of the junction. We used the procedure described in Ref. 33 to measure the escape rates Γescdc(Idc) and extract the dc escape temperature Tescdc and found that the escape temperature varied linearly with bath temperature at high temperatures. For our sample parameters, the relation Tescdc=T should be satisfied down to the lowest temperature of our fridge (12 mK). We only observed a small discrepancy at the lowest temperatures, which we attribute to improperly thermalized filters and unfiltered noise in the dual (dc+rf, Fig. 10) biasing configuration. The blue and red arrows in Fig. 17 indicate the smallest value of Tescdc. Nevertheless, the dc escape temperature data validate our normalization procedure described above. Figure 17 plots Tescrf extracted from the data shown in Fig. 16 as a function of bath temperature T. The solid lines are a plot of Eq. (16) with the corresponding values of ωd used in the measurement. The agreement between theory and experiment is excellent for both the samples with different resonant frequencies. Note that this is not a fit to the data. The only scaling of data performed, as explained above, is the extraction of Uescrf from the highest temperature data point for each sample. The results for Tescrf not only agree with theory for the lowest temperature point, but the functional dependence on temperature as we cross over from the classical (kBT⪢ℏωd) to quantum regime (kBT⪡ℏωd) is also well reproduced. This verifies that the sensitivity of the JBA when operated as a digital threshold detector is only limited by quantum fluctuations.
Qubit
 Superconducting quantum bits (qubits) are electronic circuits with discrete energy levels and are thus “artificial atoms.” 37–41 As discussed in Sec. II, the transition from the low amplitude state to the high amplitude state of the JBA depends sensitively on the critical current of the junction. This can be used to readout the state of superconducting qubits. We engineer the circuit such that the two quantum states of the qubit differ sufficiently in critical current to induce switching in the JBA when it is biased in the bistable regime. This approach has been applied to charge-phase ,42 flux ,43 and transmon qubits 44 and is currently being explored in phase 45 qubits as well. We detail measurements of a quantronium qubit 39 using the readout protocol depicted in Fig. 18. The qubit and the JBA are phase coupled via the large junction. The desired qubit state is prepared by applying the appropriate microwave pulses to the write port. The readout operation is performed by applying microwave pulses to the read port, which energizes the JBA oscillator. Biasing the JBA near its bifurcation point encodes the qubit state in the oscillation state of the JBA. The latter is ascertained by analyzing the reflected signal phase. Repeated measurements are then used to obtain the probability of switching from the low amplitude to the high amplitude state. The measurement is arranged so that the switching probability is close to zero when the qubit is in its ground state, while the switching probability is close to one when the qubit is in its first excited state. Ideally, we would like the switching probability to be zero for qubit ground state and one for qubit excited state. Neglecting the dissipation induced in the transmission lines, the total Hamiltonian of the quantronium coupled to a JBA resonator is Ĥ(t)=Ĥbox(t)+Ĥres(t) (Ref. 42) withĤbox(t)=4EC[N̂−12+CgU(t)2e]2−(EJ cosδ̂2)cos θ̂,Ĥres(t)=q̂22Cs−EJR cos δ̂−φ0I(t)δ̂.This Hamiltonian has been written supposing that the asymmetry between the two small junctions is zero and the dc values of the offset gate charge and loop flux have been adjusted to operate at the degeneracy point, i.e. CgU/2e=1/2 and zero flux in the loop. Here, N̂ and q̂/2e are the momenta conjugate to the generalized positions θ̂ and δ̂, respectively. The control parameters U(t)=Urf(t)cos ωrft and I(t)=Irf(t)sin ωdt are analogous to electromagnetic probe fields in an atomic system and induce a charge excitation of the write port and a phase excitation of the read port, respectively. If we keep these two lowest states in the Hilbert space of Ĥbox (Ref. 46) and we express Ĥres in terms of the photon creation and annihilation operators, we obtain an effective HamiltonianĤeff=2CgU(t)eECσX−EJ2σZ+ℏωp0(1+λσZ)a†a−μ(1+λ4σZ)(a+a†)4−f(a+a†)I(t),whereωp0=EJRφ02CS,λ=EJ4EJR,μ=ECR12=112(e)22CS,f=φ0(2ECREJR)1/4.
The photon annihilation operator a is related to δ̂ byδ̂=a+a†(EJR/2ECR)1/4,which represents the decomposition of the gauge-invariant phase difference into annihilation and creation operators of the “plasma” mode whose bare frequency is ωp0. The operators σX and σZ are the Pauli spin operators, and ECR=e2/(2CS) is the single electron charging energy of the readout junction. In this effective Hamiltonian, the expansion of cos δ̂ is carried out only to the first anharmonic term, which describes the nonlinear resonator dynamics with sufficient accuracy for a bifurcation readout. We now describe the role of each term in Eq. (25). The first term describes the influence on the qubit of the charge port drive, which is used to manipulate its state. The second term describes the free evolution of the qubit at the Larmor frequency ω01=EJ/ℏ. We have supposed here that the ratio EJ/EC is sufficiently small that corrections to the Larmor frequency involving EC are small. To model the behavior of qubit samples with an appreciable EJ/EC ratio, we would keep higher order terms, yielding renormalized values of the coefficients in Eq. (25). The third term describes the dominant coupling between the qubit and the resonator and results in the qubit state affecting the resonant frequency of the resonator. Note that this term commutes with the Hamiltonian of the qubit when U=0, offering the possibility of quantum nondemolition measurements . 47 The fourth term is the consequence of the nonlinearity of the resonator and leads to a decrease in the frequency of the resonator when its photon population increases as discussed earlier in Sec. II. Finally, the fifth term describes the excitation of the resonator by the drive current applied through the read port. The coherence properties of different qubit samples were measured and typical results are shown in Fig. 19. Panel (a) shows the Rabi oscillation data. The Rabi decay time T̃2 was found to be in the range 0. 8–1.7 μs depending on the sample and precise biasing conditions. A linear dependence of the Rabi oscillation frequency νRabi with the microwave drive amplitude Urfmax was observed, in agreement with the theory of driven two level quantum systems. Panel (b) shows the decay of the excited state lifetime (T1) with typical lifetimes being in the range of 1–5 μs. The values of T1 obtained with our dispersive readout are comparable with the results of Vion et al.39 but are significantly shorter than the values expected from coupling to a well thermalized 50 Ω microwave environment shunting the qubit. The loss mechanisms giving rise to the observed energy relaxation are not understood at this time. Panel (c) shows the Ramsey oscillation data, which allow one to measure the decay time of qubit phase coherence during free evolution of the qubit state. Typical Ramsey decay times observed were T2∼300 ns. The Ramsey fringes decay time T2 has a component due to energy relaxation and one due to pure dephasing: 1/T2=1/(2T1)+1/Tφ, where Tφ represents pure dephasing. In our measurements, T2 is usually dominated by pure dephasing, which is due to fluctuations in the qubit transition frequency originating from 1/f offset charge noise. Recent qubit measurements using the cavity version of the JBA show that the dephasing times are compatible with the magnitude of the typical 1/f offset charge noise seen in these systems . 13 Immunity to 1/f charge noise can be achieved by increasing the EJ/EC ratio in these qubits, and we observed some improvement in the pure dephasing time for such samples. This strategy is implemented in new qubit implementations, which use very large EJ/EC ratios to almost eliminate the gate charge dependence of the transition frequency. Panel (d) shows the S-curves corresponding to the qubit being in the ground and excited states. The open circles in blue and red correspond to data for the qubit ground and excited states, respectively, while the solid black line is the best fit through the ground state data. The dashed black line is a shifted version of the solid black line to match the excited state data for low switching probabilities. This was done to indicate the small difference in the shape of the excited state S-curve resulting in the reduction in readout contrast. The observed contrast for this data is about 15%–30% smaller than expected. In a set of experiments described in Ref. 20, we used two readout pulses in succession to determine that a 15%–30% loss of qubit population occurs even before the resonator is energized to its operating point. We attribute this loss to spurious on-chip defects . 49 As photons are injected into the resonator, the effective qubit frequency is lowered due to a Stark shift via the phase port. When the Stark shifted frequency coincides with the frequency of an on-chip defect, a relaxation of the qubit can occur. Typically, the qubit frequency samples 200–300 MHz before the state of the qubit is registered by the readout, and three to four spurious resonances are encountered in this range. Presently, this phenomenon seems to be limiting the qubit measurement fidelity. The detailed back-action of the JBA on the qubit is still not fully understood and is a topic of current research.51

 As discussed in Sec. I, one can replace the single junction in the JBA with a two junction SQUID to make a sensitive flux detector. Magnetic flux coupled to the SQUID loop modifies its effective critical current and hence can be detected using the JBA principle. There are several modes in which such a magnetometer can be operated. Biasing in the hysteretic regime permits a digital readout, similar to the qubit measurements described above, and could potentially be used for spin state measurements of magnetic molecules. It is also possible to bias in the vicinity of the bifurcation point where the response is nonhysteretic, but the nonlinearity boosts sensitivity. Such a device can detect fast flux changes, which can be used to study the dynamics of nanomagnets . 52 It is important to distinguish a JBA magnetometer from a conventional dc SQUID device and other rf biased SQUIDs. In the dc SQUID, the magnetometer is biased near the resistive transition where the static voltage is used to register flux coupled to the SQUID loop. A shunt resistor is used to suppress hysteresis in the current-voltage characteristic. Such devices can exhibit bandwidth in excess of 100 MHz with μΦ0 sensitivity 53 but at the expense of dissipation in and around the SQUID. The JBA magnetometer is an inductive device in which the magnitude of the phase excursion δ is always less than π, thus avoiding the dissipation and back-action associated with switching into the voltage state. As such, flux sensitivity alone is not sufficient to compare these two types of magnetometers as their measurement back-action is very different. Radio frequency biased SQUIDs (Ref. 54) do not generate a static voltage but typically do have phase excursions beyond a single well of the washboard potential and the associated back-action. SQUIDs have also been operated in the inductive mode ,55,56 typically where the phase excursion is very small and the anharmonicity of the SQUID potential is not sampled. In the JBA magnetometer, we discuss a device where the quality factor is kept low for enhanced bandwidth and the SQUID is biased near the bifurcation point for enhanced sensitivity. We built a rf magnetometer by embedding a tunnel junction SQUID in a λ/4 coplanar stripline resonator. The principle of operation is exactly the same as the lumped element version with a slight difference in the effective circuit. Figure 20(a) shows a schematic of this circuit, and images of the magnetometer are shown in Fig. 20(b). The device was fabricated using standard e-beam lithography with device parameters chosen to yield a resonant frequency of 1.35 GHz when the flux through the SQUID loop is zero. The quality factor Q of the resonator was around 800. A superconducting coil was used to apply a dc magnetic flux to bias the SQUID. An on-chip coplanar waveguide transmission line with a short circuit termination was used to couple high frequency signals to calibrate the device. The sample box along with the bias coil was enclosed in a superconducting aluminum box to shield from magnetic noise. The microwave measurement setup was similar to the one shown in Fig. 9 but had additional lines to bias the coil and the on-chip flux line. The reflected signal phase as a function of the bias flux and drive frequency is shown in the inset of Fig. 21. As expected, we observe the periodic dependence of the resonance frequency (yellow color corresponding to zero phase) as a function of bias flux. The reflected signal phase is plotted as a function of drive power and frequency in Fig. 21 and characterizes the nonlinear response of the resonator. This plot is similar to Fig. 13, but here the power was swept in both directions for a given frequency. The different sweep directions are interlaced in the plot. The sweep direction only affects the hysteretic regime as observed in the striped region in the top left part. One can clearly see the upper and lower bifurcation points. For magnetometry, the device was operated in the linear and the single-valued nonlinear regime by adjusting the microwave power. Small changes in input flux are converted into small changes in the phase of the microwave signal reflected from the resonator, forming the basis of detection. In this technique, the noise temperature of the microwave electronics sets the phase resolution and ultimately determines the magnetometer sensitivity. In the linear regime, the dominant noise contribution comes from the cold HEMT amplifier assembly which has a system noise temperature of about 10 K. In order to characterize the performance of this device as a flux sensor, we carried out the following experiment. The dc coil was used to bias the SQUID at a sensitive point. The fast flux line was then used to send a small calibrated ac flux signal at a frequency of 10 Hz. A vector network analyzer was used to determine the oscillations in the reflected signal phase, which was then transferred to a computer. These oscillations were then Fourier-transformed and the signal to noise ratio (SNR) of the resulting peak at 10 Hz was determined. Since we know the magnitude of the ac flux signal, we can extract the value of the smallest flux signal, which can be resolved with unity SNR in a 1 Hz bandwidth. We call this number the effective flux noise in our system. Figure 22 shows a plot of the effective flux noise as a function of microwave drive power for three different flux bias points (different sample than one in Fig. 21). One expects the SNR to improve when larger microwave power is used to probe the resonator, resulting in a lower effective flux noise. The dashed lines indicate the improvement expected if the resonator was linear. The advantage of the JBA principle is clearly visible as the nonlinearity sets in at higher drive powers [see Figs. 5(a) and 5(b)]. Under these bias conditions the JBA exhibits significant parametric gain, effectively lowering the system noise temperature, and results in the lowest observed flux noise of 1 μΦ0/(Hz) for this device. This demonstrates that a microwave readout of a SQUID can lead to a fast sensitive flux detector. One should note that it is possible to operate the magnetometer in the digital mode by biasing the oscillator in the bistable region as was done for the qubit readout. In this mode, the magnetometer is essentially a 1-bit flux sampler. However for measuring continuous changes in flux, it is a more cumbersome mode of operation involving pulse preparation and processing and one would prefer the analog mode where only a continuous microwave signal is required. We tested the magnetometer in the digital mode (data not shown) as well and obtained similar effective flux noise performance. We will conclude this section with some remarks about optimizing the performance of such a magnetometer. As mentioned earlier, the system noise temperature of the amplification chain determines the lowest flux noise for a given set of SQUID parameters. In principle, operating the JBA at high parametric gain points should result in a noise temperature approaching the standard quantum limit. We are presently exploring this possibility. The choice of the quality factor Q of the resonator is another important criterion for optimizing effective flux noise. A higher Q will give you a larger phase shift per unit change in flux but at the cost of reduced bandwidth and possibly lower operating powers, which can even make the effective flux noise worse. As the data suggest, accessing the nonlinearity of the SQUID gives you enhanced performance even for a low Q device. However this also comes at the cost of reduced bandwidth (data not shown) since gain-bandwidth for such systems is fixed. Another parameter that influences the effective flux noise is the drive power, and in principle one can improve the performance by increasing it. In practice there is always a maximum operable limit for a given device due to its finite dynamic range of operation, e.g., entering the bistable regime in the JBA. One could also trade-off nonlinearity for higher operating powers by reducing the coupling of the SQUID (nonlinear device) to the resonator (linear device),56 but this will predictably decrease the phase shift per unit change in flux. To summarize, quality factor, nonlinearity, operating power, and noise temperature are related to each other in a complex way, and we are presently exploring strategies to optimize for minimum effective flux noise and maximum bandwidth.
The Josephson Bifurcation Amplifier (JBA) exploits the bifurcation dynamics of the microwave-driven plasma oscillation of a Josephson junction. When biased near the bifurcation point, the driven voltage response varies strongly with the plasma frequency which is modulated by a weak external signal parametrically coupled to the critical current of the junction, thus giving rise to amplification. The Josephson Bifurcation Amplifier is capable of both analog and digital dispersive measurement with variable gain. We have demonstrated experimentaly the principle and operation of this novel amplifier by observing the Josephson plasma oscillation transition between the two dynamical states predicted for a driven nonlinear system. Using different samples, we have shown that this dynamical phenomenon is stable, reproducible, and can be precisely controlled, thus opening the possibility for practical applications such as amplification. A signal coupled to the critical current of the junction can be detected by monitoring the changes in the dynamical state of the nonlinear oscillator. This approach was used to develop a nonlinear dispersive readout for superconducting qubits by coupling a Cooper-pair box with the JBA. In order to perform a readout, the resonator is rf-energized to a level where its oscillation state now acts as a sensitive pointer of the qubit state. This technique does not generate any dissipation on-chip since the resonator is only damped by circuitry outside the chip, i.e., a 50 Ω transmission line with a matched circulator and amplifier, and enables a high-fidelity qubit readout with a megahertz repetition rate. We have measured Rabi oscillations and Ramsey fringes with sufficient speed that real time filtering to correct for drifts in the charge and flux bias becomes possible. Also, several successive readouts may be performed within the energy relaxation time of the qubit (T1). This gives valuable information on the readout-induced interaction between the qubit and its environment and accounts for the observed contrast. We also exploited the JBA principle to construct a high speed magnetometer. This was done by incorporating a tunnel junction SQUID in a coplanar stripline resonator operating at 1.3 GHz. Using the nonlinearity of the SQUID, we were able to achieve an effective flux noise of about 1 μΦ0/Hz. Further improvements are possible by optimizing the flux to critical current transfer function of the SQUID. This method can be extended to high speed magnetometry of single molecule magnets by replacing the tunnel junction SQUIDs with nano-SQUIDs which use nanoconstrictions as the Josephson elements. The advantage of the JBA over other dissipative amplification techniques such as the dc SQUIDs resides in its minimal back-action. Since there is no on-chip dissipation, the only source of back-action is the matched isolator load, which is efficiently thermalized at the bath temperature. An important point is that in the JBA, only fluctuations from the load that occur in a narrow band centered about the plasma frequency contribute to the back-action, whereas in the dc SQUID noise from many high frequency bands is also significant. Finally, the bifurcation amplifier does not suffer from quasiparticle generation associated with hysteretic SQUIDs (Ref. 57) and dc current-biased junctions 58 which switch into the voltage state. Long quasiparticle recombination times at low temperatures limit the acquisition rate of these devices, while the recombination process itself produces excess noise for adjacent circuitry.59