The design and performance of the first vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) laser-based angle-resolved photoemission (ARPES) system are described. The VUV laser with a photon energy of 6.994eV and bandwidth of 0.26meV is achieved from the second harmonic generation using a novel nonlinear optical crystal KBe2BO3F2. The new VUV laser-based ARPES system exhibits superior performance, including superhigh energy resolution better than 1meV, high momentum resolution, superhigh photon flux, and much enhanced bulk sensitivity, which are demonstrated from measurements on a typical Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8 high temperature superconductor. Issues and further development related to the VUV laser-based photoemission technique are discussed.
Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) is a powerful tool in probing the electronic structure of solids . 1,2 When a light illuminates on a material, it kicks out photoelectrons, a phenomenon well known as the photoelectric effect. ARPES measures the energy distribution of photoelectrons at different emission angles with respect to the sample surface normal, thus directly measuring two fundamental quantities for describing the electronic state of a solid, i.e., energy (E) and momentum (k). Theoretically, under the sudden approximation, ARPES measures a single particle spectral function A(k,ω), with k and ω representing momentum and energy, respectively ,4 a quantity that can be proposed or calculated from theoretical models. The power of ARPES in directly extracting electronic state information and its direct comparison between experiment and theory have made it a prime choice in studying advanced materials, particularly high temperature superconductors 5–7 and other strongly correlated electron systems . 8 Because most of the macroscopic properties of a material are dictated by its microscopic electron dynamics, specifically within an energy range of a few kBT (kB being the Boltzman constant and T temperature) near the Fermi level, high energy resolution has been a long-sought goal of photoemission technique in order to probe intrinsic electronic structures . 1 Started in the early 1970s,9 ARPES has experienced a dramatic improvement in its instrumental performance, particularly in the last two decades that can be accounted for by a couple of reasons. First, because it is an indispensable technique in band mapping of materials, there has been a strong impetus from the stringent requirement of prominent scientific issues to push the ARPES technique forward. Among the numerous phenomena manifested by the correlated electronic materials, one of the most fascinating examples is high temperature superconductivity, which has been at the forefront of condensed matter physics research since its discovery in 1986.10 Later on, collossal magnetoresistive materials and other exotic and extreme quantum phenomena in condensed matter physics have been discovered. Second, the development benefits greatly from the synchrotron radiation technology, its development from the first generation to the contemporary third generation has provided the photoemission technique a high performance light source with high energy resolution, high photon flux, and photon energy tunability. Third, the advancement of photoemission technique has benefitted profoundly from the dramatic advancement of electron detection technology. With the advent of an advanced electron energy analyzer from Scienta in the middle 1990s, the energy resolution experienced a jump from long-staggering 20–40meVto5meV, which can now reach 1meV or better for the latest electron analyzers . 12 Particularly, the evolution of electron detection from one-dimensional to two-dimensional scheme has not only improved the angular resolution from previous 2° to nearly 0.2°, but greatly enhanced the efficiency in data acquisition and the way of ARPES data analysis . 13 It is now routinely possible to get an energy resolution around 10 meV and angular resolution of 0.2°, combining the latest synchrotron radiation light source and an advanced electron energy analyzer. The latest development has elevated ARPES technique from a traditional band mapping tool to a probe of many-body effect, i.e., the interaction of electrons with other entities such as electrons, phonons, etc., in a solid. Some prominent scientific issues, such as mechanism of high temperature superconductivity and potential necessity in developing a new theoretical paradigm for strongly correlated electron systems, have set even higher standard on the photoemission technique. One is apparently the further improvement of energy and momentum resolution. Various energy scales on the order of 1meV, such as a superconducting energy gap in conventional superconductors ,14 some high temperature superconductors, and other recently discovered novel superconductors, ask for an energy resolution of ARPES system to be near 1meV or better. The probing of many-body effects, specifically the mode coupling in the electron self-energy, also asks for such a superhigh energy resolution. One obvious characteristic of present ARPES technique is its extreme surface sensitivity. This is related to the short inelastic mean free path in the photon energy range of interest. Between the energy range of 20 and 50eV, that is most commonly used for valence band photoemmsion, the corresponding inelastic mean free path is only on the order of 5–10Å, i.e., representing only the topmost one or two layers of the sample. While this surface sensitivity is beneficial for surface study, it may stand out as a serious drawback in probing bulk properties. For understanding problems of the bulk nature, such as in high temperature superconductors, it has been a long-standing concern how much the photoemission measured results are representative of the bulk properties. To overcome this shortcoming, one approach is to move to the high photon energy which will enhance bulk sensitivity, e.g., at 1000eV, the corresponding inelastic mean free path can be increased up to ∼20Å. However, this slight enhancement of bulk sensitivity is achieved at a sacrifice of signal intensity, lower energy resolution, and poor momentum resolution. Another way to enhance bulk sensitivity is to move to lower photon energy. Lower photon energy also makes it easier to achieve high energy resolution and gives rise to better momentum resolution even for the same angular resolution. With these potential advantages, it seems to be a natural choice to develop laser-based photoemission technique and this idea indeed has been around for a long time. However, a number of requirements have to be satisfied before a laser can be used for high resolution photoemission: (1) High photon energy: For photoemission process to occur, the photon energy must be large enough to overcome the work function of the material under measurement. Since a work function of 4–5eV is common, a photon energy larger than 5eV is essential. (2) High photon flux: The laser to be used must have enough photon flux to get decent photoemission signal. (3) Narrow bandwidth: The bandwidth of the laser will be a major factor in determining the overall instrumental energy resolution. To get high energy resolution, narrow bandwidth of laser is necessary. (4) Continuous-wave (CW) or quasicontinuous-wave laser: Because photoemission process involves the space charge effect that may shift the energy position and broaden the linewidth ,18 it is preferable to use CW or quasi-CW laser in order to minimize the space charge effect for getting high energy resolution. (5) Compatible electron detector: The relatively low energy of photoelectrons puts stringent demand on the electron energy analyzer that can, not only work at such a low electron kinetic energy, but also has an energy resolution that is good enough to take full advantage of the narrow bandwidth of the laser. Theoretically, there has been also a concern whether the sudden approximation that has been the theoretical foundation for treating high photon energy photoemission process is still valid at low photon energy. The recent progress in generating ultraviolet (UV) and vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) laser by utilizing nonlinear optical crystals has made a big progress in laser photoemission. Using KBe2BO3F2 (KBBF) crystal, Kiss et al. developed a quasi-CW VUV laser with a photon energy of hν=6.994eV and applied to photoemission technique. The system realized, for the first time, an energy resolution better than 1meV, achieving an overall energy resolution of 0.36meV, 0.26meV from the laser source and 0.25meV from the electron energy analyzer. However, the photoemission measurements reported so far have been confined to angle-integrated mode. Independently, Dessau’s group reported successful development of UV laser-based angle-resolved photoemission setup. The highest photon energy they can achieve is 6.05eV, with a linewidth of 4.7meV, while the overall energy resolution of the system is ∼8meV. Compared with synchrotron light source, much improved performance has been observed through using this UV laser-based ARPES syetsm. However, in addition to a relatively poor energy resolution compared to the VUV laser used by Kiss et al.,20 the relatively low photon energy limits the momentum space that can be reached. Particularly, the inability to reach the antinodal region in high temperature superconductors and other related correlated electron systems poses as a serious limitation in this UV laser-based ARPES setup. In this article, we report a VUV laser-based ARPES system that not only has a superhigh energy resolution better than 1meV, but also with angle-resolved mode that can cover larger momentum space; specifically, it can approach the antinodal region in high temperature superconductors and other related materials. To our best knowledge, this is the first VUV laser-based ARPES system with an energy resolution better than 1meV. In the following sections, we will describe the design of the experimental VUV laser ARPES setup. We will also demonstrate its superior performance by some testing and measuring on a typical Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8 (Bi2212) high temperature superconductor.
Figure 1 shows a photograph of our VUV laser-based ARPES system. As labeled in the figure, the setup is composed of two major parts: the VUV laser optical system and the angle-resolved photoemission spectrometer system. The latter is further divided into four main components: (1) mu-metal ARPES measurement chamber; (2) Scienta R4000 electron energy analyzer; (3) sample manipulator and cryostat; and (4) preparation chamber and sample transfer system. In the following, we will give more detailed description of these components individually.
The VUV
 A simple and straightforward way to generate UV and VUV lasers is to utilize the higher harmonic effect of the nonlinear optical (NLO) crystal. A good VUV NLO crysal should have a large NLO coefficient, short absorption edge below 200nm, and moderate birefringence (for practical use, the birefringence should be moderate, 0.07∼0.10). Figure 2 summarizes the shortest second-harmonic generation (SHG) wavelength available for the typical and well-developed NLO crystals. Even though β-BaB2O4 (BBO) and LiB3O5 (LBO) are very useful for second harmonic generation from visible to ultraviolet all the way to 200nm, their capabilities below 200nm are severely limited. In the case of BBO, since the absorption edge is at 189nm, it can only achieve SHG output not shorter than 210nm. For LBO, although the transparent range is wide, the phase matching is limited by its small birefringence. As a result, the shortest SHG output wavelength is only 276nm under phase-matching conditions . 24 KBe2BO3F2 (KBBF) is a novel UV NLO crystal that can break the 200nm wavelength barrier and enter the VUV region. It has a large NLO coefficient of d11=0.49pm∕V, good birefringence of n=0.072, and a very short cutoff wavelength of 152nm. So far, it is the only crystal available that enables phase matching below 160nm for SHG. However, a major obstacle of using KBBF lies in its platelike nature. It is difficult to grow large-sized KBBF crystal thicker than 1mm. Such a thin crystal cannot be cut at the phase-matching angle. To solve this problem, Chen et al. developed a prism-coupling technique (prism-coupled technique device, PCT) as schematically shown in Fig. 3, 26–28 which is composed of a KBBF crystal sandwiched in between two CaF2 prisms with a proper apex angle. The two interfaces between KBBF and CaF2 prisms were brought into optical contact, and they are pressed from both sides by two stainless-steel pieces with four screws to maintain long-term optical contact. At present, the transmission loss per interface is approximately 5%. By using this KBBF-PCT device, 172.5 and 163.3nm wavelengths have been demonstrated which are the shortest achieved so far by nonlinear crystals for SHG and sum-frequency mixing (SFM), respectively. The 177.3nm VUV laser used in our ARPES system is generated by frequency doubling of the original 355nm laser through the KBBF-PCT device; the related optical system is schematically shown in Fig. 4. The key element is an optically contacted KBBF-CaF2 prism-coupled device (the thickness of KBBF is 1.2mm). The KBBF-PCT device sits on a stage with XYZ translation and one rotation in order to adjust the position and phase-matching angle. The KBBF-PCT stage together with the two following reflection mirrors are motor controlled from outside of the optical chamber. The 355nm laser comes from a frequency-tripled Nd:YVO4 laser (Vanguard, Spectra Physics) which produced a train of 10ps pulses with a repetition rate of 80MHz and a maximum output power of 4W. It is introduced into the frequency doubling chamber by a pair of reflection mirrors and a focus lens. After frequency doubling through the KBBF-PCT device, the 177.3nm VUV laser is reflected by two mirrors and focused onto the sample position in the measurement chamber. Because the 177.3nm can easily be absorbed by air, the KBBF-PCF device and all the optical elements hereafter are put inside an optical chamber. The chamber is filled with inert gas such as helium or nitrogen. A complete inert gas exchange is necessary or the remnant air in the optical chamber can significantly reduces the 177.3nm laser power. The optical chamber and the ARPES measurement chamber are separated by a CaF2 window which can allow the 177.3nm laser pass through while keeping the ultrahigh vacuum of the measurement chamber intact. The 355 and 177.3nm lasers have linear polarization with the E vector pointing to the vertical direction. The advantages of our 6.994eV VUV laser over 6eV UV laser lie in both the superior energy resolution and larger momentum space coverage. The linewidth of our VUV laser is ∼0.26meV, while it is ∼5meV for the UV laser. At hν=6.994eV, the maximum in-plane momentum covered is 0.84Å−1 taking a work function of 4.3eV that is common for high-Tc materials, while it is 0.67Å−1 for hν=6eV. The advantage of larger photon energy is obvious here because VUV laser can reach the important (π,0) antinodal region of high-Tc materials and other transition metal oxides (the corresponding momentum is π∕a with a being the lattice constant; for high-Tc materials, a∼3.8Å, so (π,0) corresponds to a momentum of ∼0.83Å−1).
Advanced angle-resolved photoemission
 The spectrometer system has been designed to be compact, efficient, and user friendly. It is composed of mu-metal measurement chamber, electron energy analyzer, sample manipulator and cryostat, and preparation chamber and sample transfer system.
Ultrahigh vacuum mu-metal measurement 
 In an angle-resolved photoemission measurement, the photoelectron emission angle carries important information about its momentum. To keep the trajectory of the photoelectrons intact, the residual magnetic field near the sample region and on the way to the electron analyzer must be minimized. This is particularly crucial for laser-based photoemission system because photoelectrons with low kinetic energy are more susceptible to small magnetic field. To best screen the earth field or the magnetic field from surrounding environment, we have made our measurement chamber directly using mu-metal. In addition, another mu-metal magnetic shield liner is added inside the mu-metal chamber and all the ports are connected with long mu-metal sleeves. The liner is tightly coupled to the outside one of the two mu-metal layers of the electron energy analyzer. The measurement chamber and electron energy analyzer are demagnetized together after assembly. With all these delicate configurations, the remanent field in the sample region reaches a very low level with three components of 0.1, 0.5, and 0.6mG, an overall magnitude of 0.8mG. The measurement chamber is connected to a cryopump and an ion pump for reaching ultrahigh vacuum. After baking, it can reach a base pressure better than 5×10−11Torr. It is also equipped with a Gammadata high flux discharging lamp with a toroidal grating monochromator which can provide UV light at 21.2eV (helium I) and 40.8eV (helium II).

 The photoelectron signal is measured using a high-resolution hemispherical electron analyzer, Gammadata-Scienta R-4000. One of the outstanding features of this analyzer is its high energy resolution that reaches the sub-meV region. For example, with a slit size of 0.1mm and a pass energy of 1eV, the energy resolution of the analyzer can approach 0.25meV. This is well matched to the extremely narrow linewidth (∼0.26meV) of our VUV laser source to give an overall energy resolution better than 1meV. Another unique feature of the R4000 analyzer lies in its two-dimensional detection scheme that can measure the intensity of photoelectrons over a wide angle range simultaneously. Since the kinetic energy of photoelectrons excited by our VUV laser is rather low, it was a big challenge to make the angular modes work at such low kinetic energies. The performance of the angular mode also depends sensitively on the spot size on the sample. Much effort has been placed into optimizing the angular mode lens tables that satisfies the stringent requirements of low energy laser ARPES. We have three angular modes that can cover 30°, 14°, and 7° and three sets of such lens tables for the spot size of 2.0, 0.8, and 0.1mm, respectively. The 30° angular mode is particularly useful for covering large momentum space at the same time.

 The sample manipulator consists of a three-axis positioning device for XYZ translation (VG, Centiax Translator) and a differentially pumped rotating platform (VG, RP100M) for the polar rotation (named hereafter φ) of the sample. The custom-made low temperature cryostat has two axis rotations of the sample: the tilt (θ) and azimuthal (ω) which is set on top of the rotary seal. In this way, the sample has access to all six degrees of freedom including three translations and three rotations. All the translations and rotations are driven by stepping motors (McMillan Motion Control, Inc.) that are controlled through a computer. A LABVIEW program is developed to control the six-axis motions in a versatile way such as absolute movement, relative movement, origin adjustment, and position calibration and limitation. The control accuracy and reproducibility of the angles are 0.005°. The accuracies of X, Y, and Z movements are 0.001, 0.001, and 0.01mm, respectively. The cryostat is cooled down by continuous flow of liquid helium, and the lowest temperature the goniometer can reach is ∼12K at the sample position. The cryostat has a button-heater embedded near the end of the cold head that can vary the sample temperature between 12 and 450K. Controlled by an advanced proportional-integral-derivative (PID) temperature controller, the sample temperature can be stabilized to be within 0.1K. The temperature is measured by a standard Si diode (LakeShore, DT-471) with a measurement accuracy of 1K. In order to minimize the sample position shift during sample temperature change due to thermal expansion/contraction, the goniometer is not attached directly onto the end of cryostat cold end. Instead, it is mounted near the end of a stainless steel tube surrounding the cryostat rod. This supporting tube remains at room temperature so it does not experience expansion or contraction when the cryostat undergoes a warming/cooling process. The goniometer is connected to the cold end of the cryostat through a flexible copper braid, a copper radiation shield is installed to reduce radiation heating of the sample stage. In order to thoroughly eliminate the stray magnetic field in the sample region, special caution is taken to assure that only nonmagnetic components and materials are used in the goniometer and cryostat fabrication.
Preparation chamber
 Above the mu-metal measurement chamber is a sample preparation chamber which is separated from the measurement chamber by an UHV gate valve. This configuration makes it easy and time saving for cryostat maintenance. The preparation chamber is equipped with a wobble stick for cleaving samples, a sputtering gun for cleaning sample, and a low energy electron diffraction (LEED) for sample surface characterization. It also hosts a residual gas analyzer (RGA) for leak checking. The preparation chamber is connected to the sample transfer system that can transfer samples in and out of the preparation chamber from air without baking or breaking ultrahigh vacuum in the preparation chamber. The sample transfer system consists of two stages separated by a valve. When transferring samples, the first stage is vented and loaded with samples. After pumping to a vacuum of 10− 7–10−8Torr, the samples can be transferred into the second stage with a better base pressure of 10− 9–10−10Torr, and further transferred to the preparation chamber.
The energy resolution of the VUV laser ARPES system is calibrated by using the Fermi edge of a cleaned polycrystalline gold, as shown in Fig. 5 measured using 2eV pass energy and 0.1mm analyzer slit of the electron energy analyzer. Here, the gold is attached directly to the end of the cryostat so it can reach a lower temperature of 9.22K. By fitting the Fermi edge with a Fermi distribution function, the 12%–88% width is obtained to be 3.211meV. After subtracting the temperature broadening contribution (9.22K corresponding to 3.162meV), one gets an overall energy resolution of the VUV laser ARPES system as 0.56meV. This overall width is usually composed of three main contributions: (1) VUV laser linewidth (0.26meV), (2) analyzer resolution (for 2eV pass energy and 0.1mm slit, an ideal energy resolution is 0.5meV), (3) contribution of space charge effect 18 which depends on photon flux, spot size, and other factors. In this case, the contribution from the laser source and the analyzer gives an energy resolution of 0.56meV that comes very consistent with the measured value (0.56meV). Note that, because of relatively high sample temperature, there is an uncertainty in getting precise energy resolution when trying to extract a small contribution from the main contribution of temperature. We did not use the best measurement condition, i.e., 1eV pass energy and 0.1mm slit of the analyzer, to test the energy resolution because of the uncertainty. In this case, the combined energy resolution from both the VUV laser (0.26meV) and the analyzer (0.25meV) would amount to 0.36meV, as demonstrated by Kiss et al. tested using low sample temperature (2.9K). We note that, although we cannot test such high energy resolution because of our relatively high temperature of gold, the performance of our ARPES system is similar to that from Kiss et al., so the best energy resolution of 0.36meV can be expected also in our system.
Photon
 The 177.3nm laser power generated right behind the KBBF-PCT device is measured with a power meter (LP-3A, Physcience Opto-electronics Co. Ltd. Beijing), calibrated using a green laser at 532nm (calibration at 177.3nm is not available) by National Institute of Metrology of China. Using a KBBF-PCT with a KBBF thickness of 0.8mm, a frequency doubling power of 1.68mW is achieved with a 2W input power at 355nm. As the input power increases, or the thickness of KBBF increases, a higher 177.3nm laser power is achievable. Assuming that the calibration of the power meter at 532nm is close to that at 177.3nm, 1.68mW corresponds to a 177.3nm photon flux of 1.5×1015photons∕s. This photon flux is nearly two or three order of magnitude higher than that available from third-generation synchrotron undulator beamlines. In the mean time, the bandwidth of our VUV laser (0.26meV) is more than one order of magnitude better than the synchrotron radiation (usual working resolution: 10–15meV, the best working resolution is ∼4meV, Ref. 29). The 177.3nm output power is stable within 5% drift in 8h period with less than ±2°C temperature change in the environment. Such a high stability is ideal for running an ARPES experiment. Due to heat accumulation and radiation damage, a local (∼100μm) in the CaF2 or KBBF crystals may get damaged, and the incident position of the 355nm laser on the KBBF-PCT device needs to be changed periodically.

 The performance of the angular mode is tested using a special Scienta wire-and-slit device which is composed of a thin wire and a set of slit. An electron gun hits the wire and the scattered electrons pass through the slit and are detected by the analyzer. The wire and slit are arranged in the way that the spacing between the adjacent two lines represents a known emission angle (in our case, 2.5°). Figure 6 shows examples of the test patterns that are collected at 1, 2, and 5eV pass energies, respectively, and 30° angular mode with 0.1mm spot size. It gives a constant dispersion over a wide kinetic energy range, with a kinetic energy as low as 0.5eV. This makes it suitable for performing ARPES measurements using 6.994eV VUV laser where the highest kinetic energy of the photoelectrons is nearly 2.7eV with a common work function of 4.3eV. The angular resolution of the analyzer is also tested using the same wire-and-slit device. For 0.8mm spot size, it is 0.3° for the 14° angular mode, while it is 0.8° for the 30° angular mode. Note that the angular resolution is sensitive to the spot size: the smaller the spot size, the better the angular resolution. Since it is not possible to do the angular resolution test for the 0.1mm spot size using the same wire-and-slit scheme, the exact angular resolution is not known for our 0.1mm laser spot, although the upper limit is estimated to be definitely much less than 0.8° for the 30° angular mode. Note that, since the momentum resolution Δk near the Fermi level is related to the angular resolution Δθ by Δk=0.5118hν−WcosθΔθ, with hν being the photon energy, W the work function, and θ the angle with respect to the sample normal direction, the low photon energy of our VUV laser will give a better momentum resolution around the Fermi level even for the same angular resolution. For example, with W=4.3eV, the momentum resolution Δk for hν=6.994eV is only 0.4 times that for hν=21.2eV. In high resolution angle-resolved photoemission measurement, one concern is about the uniformity of the energy across the entire detector angle range that is particularly important for small energy scale measurements. This has been examined by measuring the gold Fermi edge at low temperature. Ideally, if the angular mode is working in a perfect condition, one would expect that the Fermi edge positions obtained at different detector angles should be the same. Practically, this may not happen because of potential mechanical or electrical defect associated with the analyzer. Figure 7 shows the measured two-dimensional image of the gold Fermi edge using 30° angular mode [Fig. 7(a)] and the fitted Fermi edge position as a function of the detector angle [Fig. 7(b)]. The deviation of the Fermi edge from its average position is less than ±0.3meV over the entire angular window, proving that the angular mode of our analyzer works in an excellent condition.

 The VUV laser-based ARPES is expected to greatly enhance the bulk sensitivity in probing the the electronic structure of solids. According to the “universal curve” of the electron escape depth versus electron kinetic energy, the electron escape depth at the present photon energy of 6.994eV is near 30Å, with a big uncertainty that can extend to 100Å. We note that this universal curve is mostly for simple metal systems, whether it is applicable to complex oxide compounds is not clear yet. While the absolute value of the electron escape depth may vary, however, one should expect enhancement of bulk sensitivity at lower photon energy even for transition metal oxides . 30 Since it is difficult to carry out quantitative measurement of the electron escape depth, we carried out a qualitative test by measuring Bi2212 crystal sample treated at different environments. First, we cleaved a nearly optimally doped Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8 (Bi2212) sample (Tc=90K) in situ in the ultrahigh vacuum and measured along the Γ(0,0)-Y(π,π) nodal direction at a temperature of 17K; result is shown in Fig. 8(a). The same cleaved sample was then pulled out from the measurement chamber and exposed under 1atm N2 for 1h in the second stage of the sample transfer system. It was then measured again along the same direction at 17K, as shown in Fig. 8(b). Then the sample was pulled out and stayed in the air for 1h and measured again, the measured image is shown in Fig. 8(c). We note that all three measurements were carried out in ultrahigh vacuum condition. It is clear that when the sample surface gets dirtier from the exposure to nitrogen and then air, the signal is getting weaker and the secondary scattering at high binding energy is apparently getting stronger. But the basic spectral features are still maintained in spite of such a dirty environment, a situation not possible for high photon energy such as 20–50eV. This enhancement of bulk sensitivity will not only extend the lifetime of the sample, but also makes the surface preparation less stringent. For example, it is possible to work on some materials that are hard to cleave by mild cleaning process such as annealing or sputtering.
Space charge effect
 One concern surrounding the utilization of laser in photoemission is the space charge effect that may originate from its high photon flux and pulsed nature. To check on the effect, we have measured this on polycrystalline gold at a low temperature (∼9.2K) using different laser powers. The measured Fermi level position and width as a function of laser power on the sample are plotted in Fig. 9. The Fermi level exhibits nearly 1.5meV increase when the laser power on the sample goes up to 130μW (corresponding to a photon flux of 1.1×1014photons∕s, we caution that the 177.3nm laser power here is measured using a power meter that is calibrated using 532nm laser instead of 177.3nm laser so there could be difference), while the corresponding Fermi level width shows a broadening of less than 1meV. This clearly demonstrates that there is a space charge effect involved in laser photoemission process. But for our VUV laser, the space charge effect is much weaker than that observed in synchrotron case. The underlying reasons can be manifold. First, the use of “the quasi-CW” laser with high repetition rate on the order of 80–100MHz is essential for minimizing possible space charging effects that may cause extra broadening of measured photoemission spectra. Second, the space charge effect is directly related to the number of emitted electrons. Therefore, the total number of electrons for the VUV laser is much smaller than that using high energy synchrotron because of the reduced energy window and secondary electrons. Third, because the space charge effect is actually balanced by the mirror charge effect, the combined effect relies on the duration of pulse. As indicated in the simulation (Fig. 14 in Ref. 18), the space charge effect and mirror charge effect nearly cancel each other in the range of 1–10ps pulse duration, that is, the range of our VUV laser, while it grows with further increase of the duration.

 In order to test the overall performance of our UVU laser ARPES system, we have chosen Bi2212 sample, a high temperature superconductor that has been most thoroughly studied by ARPES technique because of its layered nature and easiness of cleaving to get smooth and clean surface. Figure 10(a) shows the raw ARPES data taken along the Γ(0,0)-Y(π,π) nodal direction at a temperature of 17K, with an overall energy resolution of 1meV. The “kink” feature near 70meV appears sharply in the raw data. The superior quality of the data can be best illustrated from the energy distribution curve (EDC) at the Fermi momentum [Fig. 10(c)] and the momentum distribution curve (MDC) at the Fermi level [Fig. 10(d)]. The EDC width measured from our VUV laser system for optimally doped Bi2212 is 12meV, and 9meV for underdoped Bi2212 with Tc=75K, which is much sharper than that from the synchrotron setup (∼25meV). This is also sharper than that from the 6eV laser ARPES measurement 21 which gives a width of ∼14meV. This sharp feature can be attributed to the dramatic energy resolution improvement in our VUV laser ARPES and a lower sample temperature. To our knowledge, this is the sharpest EDC along the nodal direction that has ever been reported in Bi2212 so far. The MDC width is ∼0.0071Å−1 which is also much sharper than its synchrotron counterpart [Fig. 10(d)]. We note that the low energy photon also brings changes in the traditional way of the data analysis. This becomes obvious in converting from the sample emission angle (θ, with respect to the sample normal) to in-plane momentum k∥ (in unit of Å−1) which takes a form of k∥=0.5118hν−W−Eisinθ, with W being the work function of the sample and Ei the binding energy. For high photon energy, such as between 20 and 50eV usually used in synchrotron, small uncertainty in W and neglecting Ei give rise to little change in the momentum. However, for laser ARPES with lower photon energy such as hν=6.994eV, both the accuracy of W and effect of Ei become pronounced. Figure 9(b) shows the converted pattern considering the binding energy correction. The two momentum boundaries are no longer vertical and their spacing is shrinking with increasing binding energy. This will have effect on EDC line shape and, particularly, on dispersion extraction. The effect will get more pronounced when the photon energy is even lower, for example, 6eV UV laser ,21 and should be taken into account in the data analysis in low energy ARPES data . 21,29
The VUV laser has provided a novel light source for photoemission technique. Its utilization has successfully broken the barrier of 1meV superhigh energy resolution that has been a long-sought dream in photoemission technique. Compared with synchrotron radiation light source, it also provides an efficient, convenient, and cheap way in a laboratory-based ARPES system with many unique advantages. The superhigh energy resolution, high momentum resolution, superhigh photon flux, and enhancement of bulk sensitivity have definitely elevated the photoemission technique into a new level. One concern related to the laser photoemission is the applicability of sudden approximation. While the validation needs more theoretical and experimental efforts, we note that the measured band dispersion, Fermi surface, and overall qualitative spectral feature in Bi2212 are consistent with that measured at high photon energy. Particularly, we have observed that the EDC in Bi2212 measured at 6.994eV is even sharper than that measured at 6eV photons 21 [Fig. 10(c)]. This indicates that the sharpness of EDC in low energy ARPES is more likely due to dramatic improvement in the instrumental resolution, rather than the invalidity of sudden approximation. While the VUV laser ARPES possesses a host of advantages over present synchrotron radiation source in terms of energy resolution, momentum resolution, photon flux, and bulk sensitivity, it has its limitations and further developments are needed. The first limitation comes from its single fixed photon energy at 6.994eV. As photoemission process involves matrix element effect where the observation of bands relies on the photon energy and polarization of the incident light ,32 one fixed photon energy may miss some energy bands and, in the worst case, may not be able to work on some materials. Development from single photon energy to tunable photon energy is necessary. The second limitation is related to its polarization. For the same reason of matrix element effect, it is preferable to change the polarization vector of the linearly polarized light or change from linearly polarized light into circularly polarized light. The acquisition of circularly polarized light will also help in studying magnetic materials or magnetism-related physics issues. The third limitation lies in its relatively low photon energy that leads to a small coverage of momentum space. The laser ARPES may not be able to work on some materials with small lattice constants and larger Brillouin zone. To maintain all the advantages of the VUV laser, particularly bulk sensitivity, while reaching larger momentum space and considering practicality of the VUV laser technology, a modest energy increase from the present 6.994eVto7. 5–8eV is preferable and feasible. We note that, besides high harmonic generation from the nonlinear optical crystals, the application of lasers based on high harmonic generation from atoms or molecules 33 are worth being explored in photoemission technique as they can, not only provide the photon energy tunability which is a big limitation of the present laser system, but also higher photon energy. These lasers are making rapid progress but, presently, average intensities and repetition rates are limited. We also note that synchrotron light source is advantageous in its easy tunability over a broad energy range and can get to the energy range provided by the VUV laser. There have been efforts to push the energy resolution to the level of 1meV. The higher repetition rate (e.g., 500MHz at the Advanced Light Source35) than that of laser (e.g., 80MHz for our VUV laser) is helpful in reducing space charge effect. Therefore, the laser and the synchrotron source are complementary for photoemission experiments. The application of VUV laser in angle-integrated photoemission 20 and present angle-resolved photoemission is just a start of a whole slew of potential developments in photoemission techniques. It is expected that the superhigh photon flux and supernarrow bandwidth of the VUV laser can enhance the performance of the spin-resolved photoemission, time-resolved photoemission, and spatially resolved photoemission techniques in a similarly profound way. For example, the present spin-resolved photoemission system suffers from poor energy resolution (∼100meV) and most of them are operated in angle-integrated mode. This is mainly because the spin detector used has a very low efficiency, and the light sources used do not have enough photon flux. To get decent spin-resolved signal, one has to increase the photon flux at the expense of energy resolution and using angle-integrated mode to further increase the signal. Compared with the synchrotron radiation where the energy resolution and the photon flux are contradictory, the superhigh photon flux and superhigh energy resolution of the VUV laser will make it an ideal source for spin-resolved photoemission, even with an angle-resolved capability. In summary, we have developed the first VUV laser-based angle-resolved photoemission system with a superhigh energy resolution better than 1meV. In addition, it possesses other unique advantages such as high momentum resolution, superhigh photon flux, and much enhanced bulk sensitivity. This has elevated the ARPES technique into a new higher level, providing a powerful tool in materials science and physics. Further development of the VUV laser technology is in progress, and this novel VUV laser source will bring significant development in many other photoemission-related techniques.