During the past decade, the application of ambient pressure photoemission spectroscopy (APPES) has been recognized as an important in situ tool to study environmental and materials science, energy related science, and many other fields. Several APPES endstations are currently under planning or development at the USA and international light sources, which will lead to a rapid expansion of this technique. The present work describes the design and performance of a new APPES instrument at the Advanced Light Source beamline 9.3.2 at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. This new instrument, Scienta R4000 HiPP, is a result of collaboration between Advanced Light Source and its industrial partner VG-Scienta. The R4000 HiPP provides superior electron transmission as well as spectromicroscopy modes with 16 μm spatial resolution in one dimension and angle-resolved modes with simulated 0.5° angular resolution at 24° acceptance. Under maximum transmission mode, the electron detection efficiency is more than an order of magnitude better than the previous endstation at beamline 9.3.2. Herein we describe the design and performance of the system, which has been utilized to record spectra above 2 mbar.
The application of photoelectron spectroscopy (PES) to catalysis and environmental science has long driven the advancement of PES to function at higher pressure. While such systems have been developed for the past 30 years, 1–3 there has been a resurgence of ambient pressure PES (APPES) in the past decade due to advanced construction of electron analyzers and the exploitation of synchrotron facilities with high brightness, tunable, monochromatic light with small spot size. The first synchrotron based APPES system to employ an electrostatically controlled and differentially pumped prelens system (an “active” APPES lens system) was built at the Advanced Light Source (ALS) bending magnet beamline 9.3.2.4 After this proof-of-concept system was built, two additional second-generation systems were constructed jointly at ALS (Ref. 5) and Die Berliner Elektronen-Speicherring Gesellschaft für Synchrotronstrahlung . 6 These second-generation systems provided increased photoelectron (PE) transmission and utilized undulator beamlines. Advances in many fields, including the investigation of catalyst properties in relevant reaction conditions, 10–15 surface interactions involving water at environmentally relevant humidity 16,17 and oxidation of metals 18,19 have been pioneered utilizing these APPES endstations. Other PE based techniques, such as PE microscopy 20–23 and angle resolved PES (ARPES)24,25 matured and become powerful tools in materials science and solid state physics over the same period. X-ray PE microscopy, which can be achieved either by focusing the x-ray beam or imaging PEs with a dispersive electron lens system ,26 providing spatial mapping of elemental composition and chemical states . 27,21 ARPES has become an essential tool for electronic structure determination in modern condensed matter physics. It helped physicists, especially in the field of high temperature superconductors, to map band structures, which is the basis for understanding electron transport and surface reactivity. With similar rich phases and sensitive temperature dependence, catalysis is another example of complex phenomena in solids that can be explored using ARPES. We report on the design and construction of a new APPES system with high electron transmission and detection efficiency to reduce radiation exposure and data acquisition time. Additionally, one-dimensional imaging (spectromicroscopy) and angular modes have been developed and tested. These additional features increase our ability to extract more information from detected PEs and study more complex materials under catalytically and environmentally relevant conditions. Merging the rich landscape of PE microscopy and ARPES with the in situ capabilities of APPES will lead to deeper understanding of materials under working conditions, which is necessary for the rational design of advanced materials with tailored properties. This new system will be an important tool for the discovery and testing of new materials in energy related research.
There are numerous design criteria for an APPES system in addition to those for PES under ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) conditions. First, the UHV environment of the x-ray source must be separated from the elevated pressure of the analysis chamber. This is typically accomplished by the use of a thin silicon nitride or aluminum window. Second, the analysis chamber must be separated from the electron detector, which operates in high vacuum. This is accomplished by differential pumping through a series of apertures. The radius of the aperture between the analysis chamber and the first pumping section, R [Fig. 1(b)], in large part defines the ultimate pressure limit of the system. R, typically 0. 1–0.5 mm, determines the gas conductance from the analysis chamber into the analyzer lens column and also sets the minimum distance between the sample and aperture and therefore PE transmission through the gas (see Sec. III B). This minimum distance determines the upper limit of workable pressure. Damage of samples resulting from irradiation must be considered for PES and related spectromicroscopy techniques . 29 Decomposition of organic materials ,30 reduction of oxides ,31 and charging of insulators and semiconductors lead to unwanted artifacts . 32 APPES introduces additional challenges when samples are analyzed in reactive gas environments: gas molecules and/or adsorbates are ionized by PEs and secondary electrons, inducing unwanted reactions and leading to surface modification. Additionally, APPES experiments require higher x-ray doses because of gas-phase PE scattering, so that optimized PE transmission is of even greater importance. Maximum PE transmission has been the major design criterion of this endstation.

 The R4000 HiPP system is based on a Scienta R4000 with a two-dimensional detector consisting of two multichannel plates (MCPs) coupled to a phosphor screen and charge-coupled device (CCD) camera. Moreover, the electrostatic lens system is integrated to incorporate separated pumping sections within the lens housing. The outer stainless steel chamber extends from the fourth pumping stage to the port connecting the main chamber with the preparation chamber. To enhance the energy and spatial/angular resolution, the system has μ-metal shielding from the analysis chamber to the entrance of the hemispherical analyzer to reduce the effects of external magnetic fields. The individual μ-metal sections are interconnected to form a closed shield. The shielding in the main chamber was Au coated to protect the Ni-rich alloy from corrosion by reactive gases. The first aperture is at the front end of a removable Au coated Ti cone with a radius of 0.425 mm. The size of the first aperture is a compromise between maximizing counts at low pressure (larger radius) and increasing the maximum pressure of the system (smaller radius). To match the spot size of beamline 9.3.2, a relatively large aperture size was selected. The typical x-ray spot size at beamline 9.3.2 is 0.5 mm(V)×1.5 mm(H), spreading out much further because of the 15° incident angle. As the x-ray spot size decreases with improved beamline refocusing optics, the aperture radius can be decreased, thereby increasing the pressure without sacrificing counts. The main chamber is equipped with a four-axis motor system for computer control of sample motion by step motors with submicron precision. The sample holder is a Thermionics STLC platen with a HeatWave ceramic coated button heater for oxidizing environments. A home-built manipulator is used in conjunction with VG Scienta Omniax xyz stages, and a Thermionics rotatable axis stage. The manipulator can be cooled by water, chiller fluid, or liquid nitrogen. The main chamber is also equipped to be backfilled with gases to a few millibar during analysis. Sample cooling has been accomplished using a specially designed Peltier platen 5 and plans are currently underway to heat with a focused infrared laser to reduce background reactions during catalytic studies. The system resides at bending magnet beamline 9.3.2 at the ALS. This beamline delivers soft x-ray light in the range 30–850 eV. The beamline, which must be maintained under UHV to avoid contamination of optical elements, is separated from the main chamber by a 2 mm×2 mm×100 nm thick Si3N4 window at a distance 3.0 cm from the sample. Usual operation of the storage ring at 500 mA and beamline exit slit at 30 μm, delivers a flux of 4.6×1010 photons s−1 at 500 eV using a 600 l/mm grating. A 100 l/mm grating provides light peaked at 100 eV. The energy resolution of the beamline is about E/ΔE=3000.33 For the preparation, cleaning, and study of well-defined samples, including single crystals and thin films, a preparation chamber has been built which includes ion sputtering (PHI 20-045), LEED (VG Microtech RVL900), and a thermal evaporator. Additionally, there are many ports on the preparation chamber that can be equipped with user-provided UHV equipment. The pumping system of the APPES endstation was designed to optimize the PE count rate while also providing the highest possible maximum pressure at the sample and a low pressure (<3×10−6 mbar) at the detector. The system consists of five pumping systems separated by apertures and isolated using metallic C-ring seals. The electron focusing of the spectrometer is accomplished by using the Scienta R4000 spectrometer lenses as well as additional lens elements in a prelens system (see Sec. II C). Using the current setup, the prelens has a working distance of 1 mm (maximum transmission mode) and focuses the PEs onto the focal plane of the R4000. The additional lens elements are controlled by the analyzer electronics and have been integrated into the lens tables of the R4000. Different lens tables have been developed to provide either: the largest energy range, highest transmission, optimal spatial resolution, or angular resolution (see Secs. III B–III D).

 The first priority has been to develop a system for optimized PE transmission when the probed sample surface is at high pressure. The prelens geometry should therefore be able to reduce the pressure over a very short distance while collecting a large fraction of the PEs. Noteworthy is that the optimal solution has to take into account the size of the excitation spot and the multidimensional geometry of the gas flow. It is also important to design stable operating conditions, create flexibility in lens mode operation, maintain excellent energy resolution, and allow for the light beam to have an unimpeded path to the sample. The vision has been to design a system that is very flexible, gives a high experimental throughput, and maximum uptime. We built and empirically tested the differential pumping performance of a number of simplified models of prelenses. Using these models we have also been able to study the breakdown voltage for different pressures and gases. In addition, gas dynamic simulations based on Monte Carlo methods have been used to visualize the performance of the differential pumping system. These calculations have proven invaluable in guiding the prelens design. In Fig. 1(a) we present a gas dynamic simulation of the prelens geometry. To facilitate the calculations, we adopted a rotationally symmetric equivalent of the actual prelens geometry. The first aperture has a radius of 0.425 mm and the pressure behind the sample has been set to 10 mbar, which is higher than recommended for this aperture size (Sec. III B). Some additional boundary conditions associated with the differential pumping have been set from empirical results. We found that a prelens geometry with a relatively large acceptance angle allows for attractive gas flow and optical properties. On the low pressure side of the first aperture, the gas can significantly expand in the radial direction, resulting in a steep pressure gradient of the gas expansion zone in the direction along the optical axis [Fig. 1(b)]. An open first cone also allows for the possibility to put a second conical lens element very close to the first aperture. There are several benefits of putting a lens element very close to the first aperture. First, it allows the electron optics to control the trajectories very early in the path, making it possible to keep the trajectories close to the optical axis. Second, a very efficient differential pumping stage is obtained which implies that most of the gas load is directed toward the first pump. Third, this differential pumping stage has a high PE transmission without requiring a node of the electron trajectories. Because of the spherical aberrations inherent in electrostatic lens systems, good point-to-point imaging is limited to relatively small angular intervals. Furthermore, electrostatic lens systems inherently have strong chromatic aberrations. The position of a node will therefore be a function of the kinetic energy. This is especially important to consider when optimizing for high transmission with large pass energy, when a two-dimensional detector simultaneously collects over a large energy interval. The second differential pumping stage comprises additional lens elements and ends with an exit slit. The size of this slit is matched to the hemispherical analyzer entrance slit. The position of the exit slit is in the standard sample position of the R4000 lens. Using a matched exit slit gives sufficient differential pumping properties at this stage without reducing the electron throughput. Most importantly, the use of an exit slit provides the dynamical freedom necessary to operate complex lens modes stably and continuously over large energy ranges. The prelens moves the effective source point of the R4000 lens 100 mm further from the analyzer and matches the size and angular divergence of the beam to the analyzer acceptance properties. In typical operation, a magnified image of the sample spot is created on the exit slit. Magnifications ranging from two to six times have been used for different situations. The imaging properties of the prelens are best for a magnification of around five times. In the current design setup, the sample, first aperture, and exit slit of the prelens are all at ground potential, so that the prelens does not change the energy of the PEs. According to Liouville’s theorem, the product of the spatial and angular lens magnifications is then unity. The R4000 lens will therefore receive PEs where the angular distribution has been compressed into a range that is well adapted to its normal operation parameters. For optimal transmission, the R4000 lens can be set to very efficiently focus such a distribution on the entrance slit of the hemispherical analyzer using lens tables similar to those developed for large spots. Since the prelens can control the electron trajectories at such an early stage, a very large angular range can be transformed into a well collimated beam through the exit slit of the prelens [Fig. 1(b)]. Dependent of the chosen slit size and energy resolution, virtually all electrons that pass through the exit slit of the prelens will reach the detector. For kinetic energies below 500 eV and for spot sizes similar to the radius of the first aperture, the total transmission under UHV conditions of the system is not much different from that of a normal R4000 lens. To calculate lens tables for more complex situations, the complete lens system must be treated by the optimization routines. Both imaging mode (with good linearity and constant magnification) and angular mode (with constant dispersion and good linearity of the dispersion) have been calculated to work over large energy ranges.
The differential pumping system for the new APPES endstation is different from the first prototype system 4 and qualitatively similar to those used in the second generation systems . 4,5,7 The front aperture and first pumping stage were specifically designed to achieve the ideal gas pressure profile predicted by molecular flow through an aperture. Specifically, a Ti cone with 60° half-angle [θ, Fig. 1(b)] and thin aperture edge causes rapid expansion of the gas after crossing the aperture plane. This profile has been modeled for 1 mbar gas at a sample surface 1 mm from the first aperture with R=0.425 mm [Fig. 1(b)]. The differential pumping system of the Scienta R4000 HiPP was tested with 250 l/s turbomolecular pumps on each of the first three pumping stages (since testing, a 250 l/s turbomolecular pump was added to the fourth stage). The pressure was monitored in the first three pumping stages and near the detector while N2 was dosed into the analysis chamber. When the pressure was 8 mbar in the analysis chamber (P0=8 mbar), the first and second stage pressures measured near the pump inlets were P1=2.9×10−3 mbar and P2=4.4×10−4 mbar, respectively. The pressure at the analyzer was P5=9.9×10−6 mbar. A pressure drop of ∼106 between the main chamber and the analyzer is sufficient for pressures up to a few mbar. Using the nomenclature of Ogletree et al.,4 the maximum pressure for an APPES system is when the effective path length for PEs through a pressure PMAX is twice the electron mean free path, λe=kT/PMAXσe, where k, T, and σe are the Boltzmann constant, temperature, and the electron cross section (which depends on the identity of the gas and the PE kinetic energy), respectively. Under these conditions the measured intensity is roughly 13% of the intensity measured in vacuum (while this value is arbitrary, it serves as a good comparison between systems). To ensure that the gas pressure at the sample is at least 95% of P0, the sample must be at a distance greater than twice the first aperture radius (z≥−2R). At this minimum distance, one obtains the expression PMAX≈kT/Rσe. For 400 eV PEs through oxygen gas at room temperature, PMAX≈2.3 mbar when R=0.425 mm. When the system is used for spatial resolution (see Sec. III C), the optimum working distance is 1.9 mm=4.5R, which reduces the effective PMAX to 0.9 mbar. At a working distance of 1.9 mm, the effect of pressure on the PE count rate was determined by monitoring the Au 4f peak intensity of an Au thin film at incident photon energy 490 eV in an oxygen atmosphere over a range of pressures [Fig. 2(a)]. A fit of the data toln(I/I0)=−deffσeP0/kT,where σe=4.3×10−16 cm2 for oxygen at 400 eV KE implies deff=2 mm [Fig. 2(b)]. This value can be compared with the effective path length under conditions of molecular flow for whichdeff=(1/P0)∫P(x)dx=12(1+z2−z),where z is in units of R. At a working distance of 1.9 mm (z=−4.47R), deff (ideal)=1.92 mm (4.53R), which is within the uncertainty of the experimentally determined value of deff.

 One of the motivating factors for designing a new APPES system to replace the old APPES endstation at beamline 9.3.2 was to dramatically increase the transmission and detection efficiency of PEs. Not only does improved transmission and detection decrease data acquisition times, it also alleviates problems associated with beam damage by decreasing the radiation exposure of a sample to achieve the same counting statistics. Additionally, faster acquisition time leads to improved temporal resolution for time-resolved studies. PE spectra of Ar 2p were recorded at a pressure of 0.25 mbar Ar with 100 meV steps and 200 ms dwell time. Three scans using the high transmission mode with the new Scienta R4000 HiPP is compared with an average of ten identical scans recorded with the old endstation at beamline 9.3.2 (Ref. 4) in Fig. 3 (pass energy was set to achieve similar resolution). Clearly, there is a significant improvement in detection efficiency and therefore counting statistics, providing faster acquisition times and decreased beam damage. Even with only 30% of the counting time, the signal-to-noise is significantly improved. We estimate that the transmission of the R4000 HiPP endstation is well over an order of magnitude better than previously obtainable. For even faster acquisition times, the CCD detection can be utilized to record spectra in “fixed mode” rather than sweeping through an energy range.

 Using a dispersive hemispherical analyzer with two MCPs and CCD camera detector system, it is possible to record data in two dimensions, one of which represents the energy and the other may represent either spatial distribution or take-off angle. Within the field of view, electron counts can be averaged over a suitable energy range, while spatial or angular resolution can be obtained in the slit direction, depending on the lens table used for the spectrometer electrostatic lenses. Lens tables were developed in order to optimize the spatial resolution of the spectrometer and were tested by measuring a sample consisting of a 100 μm Au line that was e-beam deposited onto thermally grown SiO2 on a Si wafer [Fig. 4(b)] oriented such that the Au line was perpendicular to the slit. In this orientation, the Au 4f photoemission lines appear only within a narrow range of the camera image [Fig. 4(a)]. First, the magnification was experimentally determined by shifting the sample parallel to the slit with a calibrated step motor and recording the center of the Au 4f peak on the CCD camera (Fig. 5). One camera pixel corresponds to ∼1 μm, depending on the exact distance between the sample and first aperture; this agrees well with the calculated magnification of 34. After determining the magnification at each working distance, the spatial resolution of the spectrometer as a function of working distance [Fig. 4(d)] and kinetic energy was determined. The best resolution achieved is ∼16 μm. The investigation of the spatial resolution was undertaken at 100 eV pass energy. The magnification and resolution of the electron lens system are determined by the electron lens table. Spatial resolution not being a primary design requirement of the prelens system, it is difficult to achieve good spatial resolution with a short working distance. The original calculation of the optimal resolution lens table led to a working distance of 3 mm. However, this distance is too far for the x-ray beam to reach the sample with the small Si3N4 window and the beam is cut off. Second, such a long working distance will greatly reduce the electron transmission when operating at elevated pressure. We found good imaging capabilities at a working distance of 1.9 mm through our experiments with the gold bar samples. The best resolution of ∼16 μm was obtained at this distance [inset of Fig. 5(d)] at photon energy of 450 eV (370 eV KE). The spatial resolution of the system depends on the retardation ratio, and was determined to be 18, 16, and 28 μm at kinetic energy of 270, 370, and 570 eV, respectively. We believe it is possible to improve the performance of this imaging mode by improving both the x-ray spot size and the electron lens table. We are currently working to obtain a shorter working distance, larger magnification, and smaller aberration. It seems that a smaller aperture size is needed for any significant improvement.

 Similarly, it was a challenge to obtain a lens table for ARPES. Through a novel design of the prelens system and the combination of numerical simulations and experimental testing of the electron lens table, the resulting AP-ARPES capabilities are promising. Due to the lack of azimuthal rotational freedom of our manipulator, we performed the first AP-ARPES experiment on highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG). It has been demonstrated on azimuthally disordered HOPG graphite that sharp quasiparticle dispersions along the radial direction can coexist with a complete lack of dispersion along the azimuthal direction. ARPES data were collected using the wide angular mode with acceptance angle of 25° and theoretical angular resolution of 0.5°. The sample used was a grade ZYA HOPG, obtained commercially from Structure Probe Inc. The HOPG sample was cleaved in air and transferred to the load lock. The sample was then transferred into the high pressure chamber under UHV. Figure 6(a) shows an UHV ARPES intensity map taken at 120 eV photon energy as a function of binding energy and angle (in-plane momentum k), corresponding to a momentum cut along a random azimuthal direction through the Γ point on the Fermi intensity map. Due to the azimuthal disorder of HOPG, the Fermi intensity map has a perfect circular pattern. We can clearly see well-defined dispersions in excellent agreement with data collected using the Scienta R4000 at the same photon energy ,34 except with higher background intensity. This is mainly due to the large photon spot size (∼500 μm×1.5 mm) and possible surface contamination from cleavage in air. Upon sample rotation in the theta direction, all the features in the intensity map shifted accordingly, as expected. This demonstrates the linearity of the lens table over a large acceptance angle of +/−12° [comparison of Figs. 6(a) and 6(b)]. In Fig. 6(b), we show the same ARPES intensity map in an atmosphere of 0.25 mbar CO gas. Although there is an increase in background noise, the energy dispersion of HOPG is still clearly observed. A direct comparison between Figs. 6(a) and 6(b) shows no appreciable pressure dependence of the HOPG dispersion. Three nondispersive features appear at 9.5, 12.5, and 15.3 eV (referenced to the Fermi level) due to 5σ, 1π, and 4σ PEs from gas phase CO. The fact that we can perform ARPES at mbar pressures on an azimuthally disordered system is a significant advancement in APPES. This development will open new research playgrounds and will allow us to reveal the electronic structure changes of solids during solid-gas interactions. Such studies can provide unprecedented insight in many important fields, such as heterogeneous catalysis and corrosion. The measured electronic structure of model catalysts under reaction condition can be directly compared with theoretical calculations.
A new APPES endstation has been designed and built for beamline 9.3.2 of the ALS. The mission of beamline 9.3.2 is to provide state-of-the-art in situ characterization for catalysis and materials science using x-ray photoemission, which will be greatly served by this new endstation. This new endstation provides a manyfold increase in PE transmission and therefore signal-to-noise ratio and decreased acquisition time. Additionally, we also developed an imaging mode and an angle resolved mode. By recording spatial and angular information, we can obtain extra information from each collected PE. Spatial resolution of ∼16 μm provides the ability to study structured materials with junctions on the scale of tens to hundreds of microns, such as batteries, solid oxide electrochemical cells, gas sensors, etc. Angle resolved APPES opens the possibility of directly mapping the electronic structure of catalysts under relevant operating conditions. With many additional APPES systems in development or being planned at synchrotron facilities around the world, this technique is poised to reveal new insights into the structure of catalysts, the mechanisms of corrosion, and many other important industrial and environmental processes.