Microalgae dewatering is a major obstruction to industrial-scale processing of microalgae for biofuel production. The dilute nature of harvested microalgal cultures creates a huge operational cost during dewatering, thereby, rendering algae-based fuels less economically attractive. Currently there is no superior method of dewatering microalgae. A technique that may result in a greater algal biomass may have drawbacks such as a high capital cost or high energy consumption. The choice of which harvesting technique to apply will depend on the species of microalgae and the final product desired. Algal properties such as a large cell size and the capability of the microalgae to autoflocculate can simplify the dewatering process. This article reviews and addresses the various technologies currently used for dewatering microalgal cultures along with a comparative study of the performances of the different technologies.
Sustainability and environmental concerns are major issues in the world today. It is now a widely accepted necessity to reduce carbon dioxide emissions from human activities contributing to the green house effect and thus global warming . 1 Transportation energy consumes about 27% of worldwide primary energy;1 thus it is clear that a reduction in transportation and general engine-based emissions can play a significant role in the mitigation of green house gas emissions. Biofuel, as an alternative to petroleum transport fuels, has become essential to the reduction of global warming caused by fossil fueled engines. The renewable and nontoxic properties of biofuel make it a very promising alternative fuel. The production and use of biofuels contribute close-to-zero net carbon dioxide and sulfur into the atmosphere and emit fewer gaseous pollutants than petroleum fuels . 2,3 The use of microalgae as a source of biofuel production has gained enormous research interests. Microalgae are able to photosynthetically convert carbon dioxide into potential biofuel feedstocks, as well as food, feeds, and high value bioactives . 4 Microalgal crops, unlike other oil crops, are able to grow extremely fast and can double their biomass within a period of 24 h. Microalgae grow throughout the year and can be harvested continuously on insignificant land in arid regions of the world while making use of water that is not suitable for conventional agriculture. Unlike other sources of biofuel, the demand for a large area of land is greatly reduced in the case of microalgae. This is proven by the fact that only between 1% and 3% of the total U.S. crop area would be required to produce algal biomass that would satisfy 50% of U.S. transport needs . 4 Although studies have found that microalgae have definite advantages over conventional biofuel sources, broad commercialization of microalgae sourced biofuel has been restrained due to high costs of operation during processing. A particular aspect of the process that involves high operational costs is the harvesting and dewatering steps, and this is mainly due to the dilute nature of microalgal cultures. These steps require a substantial energy input and thus inflict high operational costs to the overall process. Thus, the unit operation of harvesting and dewatering is a major factor to be considered if a viable economics of algae-based fuels is desired. This would require the use of efficient and versatile dewatering technologies with high productivity and recovery under optimum economy. Microalgal harvesting is performed extensively in water treatment and biofuel production. The purpose for microalgal harvesting in biofuel production differs from that in water treatment. The removal of undesirable microalgae in the water treatment industry involves a progressive reduction in both microalgal chemical oxygen demand and biological oxygen demand to values below their discharge limits. For example, in biodiesel production, microalgae need to be concentrated as much as possible to simplify the lipid extraction step that follows. Increased product concentration decreases the cost of extraction and purification as well as the effective unit cost of the raw biomass. Although the objectives are different, the harvesting techniques involved are comparable. The main dissimilarity is that for biodiesel production, the microalgae biomass is required for further processing; therefore, the dewatering method used must not contaminate or be toxic to the system, as it may be desirable to recycle the water medium. Microalgal harvesting involves the concentration of dilute microalgal suspensions, typically 0.02%–0.06% total suspended solids (TSS) into a slurry or paste with concentrations of 5%–25% TSS or more depending on the target process objective. From Fig. 1, it can be seen that it is possible to obtain the desired microalgal concentration by a one or two step harvesting process, which involves a primary harvesting step that forms a slurry of 2%–7% TSS followed by a secondary dewatering step that produces an algal paste of 15%–25% TSS. The concentration obtained in the harvesting steps is crucial to the overall process as it influences the subsequent drying process . 7,8 Microalgae can generally be considered as particles whose stability is due to surface charge (which is electronegative for pH of 2. 5–11.5), steric effects (due to water molecules bound to the microalgal surface), and adsorbed macromolecules or extracellular organic matter. When compared to other particles in suspension, microalgae have the disadvantage that it is composed of several species with different characteristics such as size, shape, and motility that can influence their behavior toward treatment. This makes it difficult to name one single technique as the best for microalgal recovery. Several techniques for the dewatering of microalgal cultures have been developed. These techniques rely on properties that simplify the harvesting and recovery process. The properties include large cell size, high specific gravity compared to the medium, and reliable autoflocculation or induced flocculation. The major techniques currently employed in microalgae harvesting and recovery include centrifugation, flocculation, filtration and screening, gravity sedimentation, flotation, and electrophoresis techniques. These are reviewed in this article along with a comparative study of their performances.
The performance of each dewatering technique can be quantitatively evaluated by the following factors:
 the rate of water removal (productivity of dewatering technique), the solid content of the recovered microalgae-water slurry, and
 the efficiency/yield of the dewatering technique (recovered microalgae as a percentage of total processed microalgae).The main methods of measuring the amount of algae removed include absorbance, turbidity, and concentration measurements of the resulting microalgae-water slurry.
Centrifugation is a separation process that uses centrifugal forces to separate solids and liquids. The separation is based on the particle size and density difference of the medium components. The behavior of the smallest particles in the system has the largest effect on separation efficiency. A study conducted by Moraine et al.11 found that high speed centrifugation was a reliably effective recovery technique for microalgae. Laboratory centrifugation tests were carried out on pond effluent at 500g–1000g and showed that 80%–90% could be clarified and recovered in 2–5 min. Although centrifugation is an effective method of microalgal recovery, the main disadvantage is the high investment and operating costs required. Heasman et al.12 investigated the extent of cell recovery for three different centrifugation conditions for ten microalgal species. Two forms of high speed centrifugation were used with acceleration factors of 6000g and 13 000g. The third type of centrifuge was a slower laboratory style bucket centrifuge that had an applied centrifugation acceleration factor of 1300g. The results showed that >95% cell recovery was obtained with centrifugation at 13 000g. The efficiency of recovery decreased with decreasing acceleration: 60% recovery was achieved for centrifugation at 6000g and 40% recovery for centrifugation at 1300g. Centrifugal recovery was evaluated in a review by Grima et al. This review compared different applications of centrifugation for the harvesting of microalgae and concluded that although centrifugal recovery is energy intensive, it is rapid and a preferred method for microalgal cell recovery. Cell viability was found to be significantly dependent on the microalgal species and the method of centrifugation. The work of Knuckey et al.14 states that although centrifugation is a successful dewatering method, the exposure of microalgal cells to high gravitational and shear forces can damage cell structure. Also, the processing of large volumes of culture could be time consuming and costly.

 Flocculation is the process where a solute particle in a solution forms an aggregate called a floc. Flocculation occurs when the solute particles collide and adhere to each other. Chemicals called flocculants are usually added to induce flocculation. Most microalgal cells have a size range between 5 and 50 μm. Microalgal cells can form stable suspensions with a chemically reactive cellular surface that has a net negative surface charge due to the ionization of functional groups. The stability of these microalgal suspensions is dependant on the forces that interact between the particles themselves and the particles and water. The harvesting of microalgal cells by flocculation is seen to be a superior method to conventional harvesting methods such as centrifugation and floatation because it allows the treatment of large quantities of microalgal culture as well as being able to be applied to a wide range of species . 18,19 Although flocculation has proven to be successful for concentrating microalgae, the method alone may not be sufficient. Moraine et al.20 indicated that microalgal flocs have a specific gravity close to and even below that of water when exposed to light, releasing photosynthetic oxygen. This means that sedimentation of microalgal flocs may not be possible and methods combining flocculation with other techniques such as flocculation-flotation and flocculation-centrifugation may need to be looked into. There are two main types of flocculants: inorganic flocculants and organic polymer/polyelectrolyte flocculants. Many different chemicals have been tested for microalgal flocculation, and the most effective method was found to be aluminum sulfate and certain cationic polymers such as praestol, cationic polyacrlyamides (zetag 63 and zetag 92), and cationic polyamines . 19,21,22 There have also been studies on the use of microbial flocculants. Oh et al.21 looked at the use of a microbial flocculant (AM49) for harvesting mass cultured Chlorella vulgaris. This flocculant was able to obtain a flocculation efficiency, which can be defined as the recovery of algal biomass, of 83% in the pH range of 5–11, which is considerably higher than that of aluminum sulfate (72%) and cationic polymer polyacrylamide (78%).21
Polyelectrolyte
 Polyelectrolyte flocculants are described as polymeric flocculants that include ionic and non ionic species, natural and synthetic polymers . 23 The mechanism of microalgal flocculation by polymer flocculants can be explained by a combination of charge neutralization and particle bridging, the extent of each depending on the charge density and chain length of the polymer. This involves the attachment of the polymer molecule on the microalgal surface by electrostatic or chemical forces. The polymer is able to adsorb onto the surface of the microalgae due to one or a combination of Coulombic (charge-charge) interactions, dipole-dipole interactions, hydrogen bonding, or van der Waals interactions. The polymer can stick to certain points on the microalgal surface but have its tail trail out into the solvent. This results in polymer segments attached to the microalgal surface as trains, separated from one another by loops that extend into the solution and end in a tail. It is possible for the loops and tails of the polymer to attach to similar parts of polymers and form bridges (resulting in a three dimensional matrix). The extent of microalgal flocculation is determined by the degree of coverage of the microalgal surface by the polymer. If less than the optimum amount is covered by the polymer, it will result in inadequate bridging, which may not be able to withstand shear forces due to any agitation. If there is too much coverage by the polymer, it can cause electrostatic or static hindering of bridging . 17 Polymeric flocculants can either be cationic, anionic, or nonionic. In 1984 Shelef et al.7 conducted a review on microalgae harvesting and processing techniques. Polymeric flocculants reviewed by Shelef et al.7 are listed in Table I, with optimal dose and pH values. The review outlined a number of factors that could affect polymeric flocculation. It was found that increasing the molecular weight of the polymeric flocculant would lead to a lower optimal dose required. The concentration of hydrogen ions (pH) and the medium electrolyte concentration can affect the degree of ionization charge density and the extension of the polymer, the surface charge density of the microalgal surface, and even the whole flocculation process. The effect of pH was also demonstrated in a study by Tenney et al.,17 who found that the most effective flocculation with cationic polyelectrolytes was achieved at low pH levels. This is because at low pH levels, there is reduced electrostatic repulsion between colloids, and this leads to a greater chance of polymer bridging due to the expansion of the polymer chains. The concentration of microalgae can vary the microalgal surface area, which will determine the dose of polymeric flocculant required. The chemical composition of the microalgal suspension can also affect the flocculation process. The presence of certain chemicals can affect the dose of flocculant required and also the optimum pH. Another influential factor is the size of the flocs formed during flocculation. As the density of microalgae is close to that of water, flocculation can lead to the formation of flocs with low densities (especially when the concentration of the flocculant is low). Therefore, to achieve effective sedimentation, floc sizes in excess of 100 μm are required. The addition of high molecular weight bridging polymers can further increase floc size and lead to an improvement in microalgal settling . 27 Since charge neutralization is the basis for microalgal flocculation, the charge of the polyelectrolytes is a very important factor that affects the microalgae flocculation. Due to the negatively charged microalgae surface, anionic polyelectrolytes do not exert much influence if used as the sole flocculant. Early studies conducted on anionic and nonionic polyelectrolytes did not achieve successful microalgal flocculation. The inability of flocculation with anionic polyelectrolytes can be explained by repulsion between like charges or by polymer segments being unable to bridge between particles due to insufficient length. The lower the molecular weight, the more difficult it is for polyelectrolytes to be adsorbed. This means that larger amounts of polyelectrolytes are required. Even though no flocculation was observed with the anionic flocculant, it was confirmed that the anionic polymer did attach to the microalgal surface due to particle-particle bridging mechanism or an increase in negative microelectrophoretic mobility. Research has found that cationic polyelectrolytes are the most effective flocculants for microalgae recovery. Tenney et al.17 looked into the flocculation of fresh water microalgae using synthetic organic polyelectrolytes. Using the standard jar test, the extent of microalgal flocculation was determined by measuring the turbidity of the suspension after 1 h of settling. Cationic polyelectrolyte polyamine was found to flocculate the algae successfully at an optimum dose of 2.5 mg/l. The dosage of a positively charged flocculant is dependent on the amount of negative charge in the dispersed system, the surface charge density, the total cell surface area, the cell counts per volume, and the charge density of the cationic flocculant. Bernhardt et al.29 stated that functional groups on microalgal cell walls are important because they induce the formation of negative charge centers on the cell surfaces. The functional groups are mostly carboxyl groups, and these influence the isoelectric point of the microalgae cells in the aqueous medium. The concentration and reactivity of these functional groups can vary with growth phase and metabolic conditions of the microalgae. This variation directly affects the negative charge density of the microalgae and therefore influences the adsorption of organic polyelectrolytes or inorganic iron and aluminum hydroxo complex flocculants.

 Early studies on algal flocculation have shown that microalgae can be successfully flocculated when their surface charges are neutralized. Charge neutralization refers to a state where the net electrical charge of the microalgal particle has been cancelled due to adsorption of an equal amount of the opposite charge. The mechanism of microalgal flocculation with inorganic flocculants is charge neutralization, provided the microalgae are small and approximately spherical. In order for microalgae to be flocculated by inorganic flocculants, the pH needs to be low enough to form cationic hydrolysis products . 27 Shelef et al.7 conducted a detailed review on inorganic flocculants. The optimal dose and pH of certain inorganic flocculants can be viewed in Table I. Inorganic flocculants are able to form polyhydroxy complexes at an appropriate pH. The inorganic flocculants reviewed by Shelef et al.7 were alum [Al2(SO4)3⋅18H2O], ferric sulfate, and lime. The sources of data were from flocculation experiments using jar tests (batch flocculation experiments) or using a pilot scale apparatus. It was found that alum displayed a superior flocculating ability compared to ferric sulfate in terms of the optimal dose of flocculant, pH, and quality of water slurry obtained. Lime was found to have good flocculation ability, but the flocculant could only be used for microalgal cultures that had magnesium concentrations above 10 mg/l. The sludge formed from the flocculation process also contained a greater amount of lime than microalgae. A study by Ayoub et al.31 also observed that lime treatment used to induce flocculation in microalgal suspensions was more effective if the original suspension already contained magnesium or calcium ions. pH induced microalgal flocculation was studied with the addition of sea water into the medium, and results showed that the presence of sea water significantly increased microalgal cell removal. It is believed that the calcium carbonate flocs have a negative charge, while the magnesium hydroxide flocs have a positive charge. Since microalgal cells have a negative charge, the magnesium hydroxide flocs are responsible for the majority of cell removal due to charge destabilization. In the water treatment industry, alkalizing agents such as lime or sodium hydroxide have been used to raise the pH levels required to embark on chemical flocculation in microalgae. Studies have found that the use of alkalizing agents successfully results in microalgae flocculation due to the precipitation of calcium and magnesium hydroxides.32

 The combined flocculation process is a multistep flocculation process using more than one type of flocculant. The combined flocculation process was studied by Sukenik et al. Two approaches were studied: the use of both organic polymer and inorganic flocculants and the treatment of microalgal cultures with oxidants preceding the flocculation process. The sequential addition of chitosan (polymeric) and alum or ferric chloride (inorganic) flocculants showed to improve the overall degree of flocculation as well as reduce the dosage of inorganic flocculant required. Although at high ionic strengths, chitosan was found to be unable to bridge between microalgal particles, it is assumed to adsorb to the microalgal cell surface and reduce the charge—predisposing the microalgal cells to flocculation by the inorganic flocculant, thus reducing the dose.

 Autoflocculation is the spontaneous floc formation and settling of microalgae. This type of flocculation is associated with an increase in pH due to photosynthetic carbon dioxide consumption and the precipitation of inorganic precipitates. It is proposed that aside the precipitation of inorganics, the formation of microalgal aggregates can be explained by excreted organic macromolecules, inhibited release of microalgae daughter cells, and aggregation between microalgae and bacteria. Sukenik and Shelef 34 investigated autoflocculation in outdoor ponds and also in the laboratory. In the outdoor pond experiments, the microalgal species Sc. dimorphus was grown autotrophically for 7 days at a constant pH of 7 by the addition of carbon dioxide. On the eighth day, the pond agitation and carbon dioxide supply were stopped. Autoflocculation proceeded with an increase in pH due to continued carbon dioxide consumption by the photosynthetic activity of the culture. It was observed that the microalgae aggregated into flocs and settled at the bottom of the pond. The laboratory experiments also found that autoflocculation could be simulated by changing the alkaline conditions to that required for autoflocculation. The mechanism for autoflocculation is the supersaturation state of the culture medium (with respect to calcium and phosphate ions) due to the increase in pH. This supersaturation causes initial nucleation of calcium phosphate precipitation that is promoted by the microalgal cells acting as the solid surface. The calcium phosphate precipitate is positively charged (in the presence of excess calcium ions) and so is adsorbed and reacts with the negatively charged microalgal cells resulting in agglomeration.

 The majority of work done on microalgae flocculation has been on freshwater species. Microalgae growth in a high ionic strength marine environment has been studied over the years. The effect of ionic strength on the flocculation using cationic polymers has been studied in general 35 and also for use in microalgae. Bilanovic and Shelef 22 found that the high salinity of the marine environment inhibited flocculation with polyelectrolytes. Effective flocculation was attained at salinity levels lower than 5 g/l. The reduced effectiveness of cationic polymers to induce microalgae flocculation in sea and brackish waters is primarily attributed to the effect of medium ionic strength on the configuration and dimension of the polymer, as indicated by changes in the intrinsic viscosity. At high ionic strength, the polymer shrinks to its smallest dimensions and fails to bridge between algal cells . 22 The possibility of flocculating marine microalgae species using inorganic flocculants ferric chloride and alum was studied by Sukenik et al. The optimal dosage required to flocculate marine microalgae was found to be of the order of five to ten times higher than that for freshwater microalgae. The optimal dose for the two inorganic flocculants was also seen to increase significantly with an increase in the ionic strength of the media. It is proposed that the high salinity of the marine microalgae species interferes with the flocculation process by reducing the chemical activity of the flocculant and masking functionally actives sites of the flocculants.33

 This method of separation utilizes a permeable medium through which a suspension is passed. The permeable medium retains the solids and allows the liquid to pass through. Screening involves passing the suspension through a screen with a specific pore size. The solid particles that are larger than the screen pore size are retained, while the liquid phase passes through the screen. Microstrainers and vibrating screen filters are the two main types of screens used for microalgae harvesting . 7 Microstrainers can be described as rotating filters with fine mesh screens and a continual backwash. The flow-through rate of the filter determines how much culture medium is processed per microstrainer unit and is the key factor that determines the overall cost. The flow-through rate (and cost of the unit) is determined by the size of the screen openings. The size of the screen opening will be dependent on the species of microalgae. Larger microalgal species will require larger openings, resulting in faster flow rates and a lower cost. The concentration of microalgae is another factor that influences the efficiency of the process. A high microalgal concentration can result in blocking of the screen, while a low microalgal concentration can result in inefficient capture. Limitations with the use of microstrainers include incomplete solids removal and difficulty in handling solids fluctuations, which may be overcome by varying the rotation speed. Filtration requires a pressure drop to be applied across the system in order to force the fluid through the filter. The extent of pressure required for the medium determines which type of driving force is used: gravity, vacuum, pressure, or centrifugal. There are two main types of filtration: surface filters (where the solids are deposited on the filter medium in a thin film or cake) and depth filters/deep bed filters (where the solids are deposited within the filter medium). One of the major problems associated with filtration is that media that are fine enough to retain the microalgae tend to bind and therefore require regular backwashes. This results in a decrease in the amount of microalgal concentrate. Grima et al.13 conducted a review on process options available for the recovery of microalgal biomass. They found that filtration methods that operate under pressure or vacuum are suitable for recovering microalgal species with large cell size but inadequate to recover microalgal species with sizes approaching bacterial dimensions (in the range of micrometers). Diatomaceous earth has been found to be an effective filtration medium for the recovery of small size species . 13 A study was conducted on small celled microalgal species, Dunaliella, using filtration through sand filters and cellulose fibers. This method proved unsatisfactory and impractical, with an exception to filtration through diatomaceous earth. It was found that the microalgal species, when grown in salt ponds, could be recovered adequately by passing the culture medium through diatomaceous earth. The microalgal biomass can then be recovered by scraping off a thin layer of biomass from the filter aid.13

 Tangential flow filtration (or cross flow filtration) is a filtration system that has the potential to be very promising for the recovery of large volumes of microalgal culture. In tangential flow filtration, the medium flows tangentially across a membrane. The retentate is recirculated across the membrane, keeping the cells in suspension and minimizing fouling. Particles with sizes smaller than the pores of the membrane are able to pass through, while those larger in size are retained. The type of membrane used in this process may be an ultrafiltration membrane or microporous membrane, both available in a wide range of pore sizes or molecular weight cutoffs . 38 As Grima et al.13 reported, microfiltration and ultrafiltration are possible alternatives that could be used to recover microalgae. The advantage of tangential flow filtration over other recovery techniques such as conventional filtration, centrifugation, flocculation, and sedimentation is that better filtration rates can be achieved to completely remove debris and microalgal cells. Petrusevski et al.38 conducted a study on the suitability of tangential flow filtration for the recovery of microalgae. The tangential flow filtration system included a membrane with a pore size of 0.45 μm. It was found that the system could successfully recover large volumes of microalgal culture, with the overall microalgal biomass recovery being 70%–89%. It was also found that the system was able to preserve the structure and properties such as motility and negative surface charge of the microalgal biomass. Tangential flow filtration can also be used for shear sensitive suspensions and is considered a relatively cheap separation or concentration method when compared to the other recovery techniques . 39 The costs involved in this technique are related with pumping and membrane replacements . 40 Large scale recovery of microalgae using this technique can be restricted due to continuous fouling and subsequent replacement of the membranes. A study conducted by Rossignol et al.40 looked at the use of polymer membranes for the continuous recovery of the marine microalgal species: Haslea ostrearia and Skeletonema costatum. It was found that these membranes had potential for use in microalgal recovery. However the performance of these membranes depended on the hydrodynamic conditions, concentration, and properties of the microalgal culture. These membranes can generally have a relatively long operating life in appropriate conditions (i.e., low imposed transmembrane pressure and low cross flow velocity). Microfiltration membranes gave higher initial fluxes than the ultrafiltration membranes, but they were inclined to clog more easily. Figure 2 shows a schematic diagram of a tangential flow filtration system.
Gravity 
 Gravity sedimentation is a technique that separates a feed suspension into a concentrated slurry and clear liquid. Harvesting by sedimentation at natural gravity can be accomplished via lamella separators and sedimentation tanks. Lamella separators can offer an increased settling area compared to conventional thickeners due to the orientation of the plates . 8 The microalgal suspension is pumped continuously, while the slurry is removed discontinuously. The main form of energy required is that needed to pump the slurry. Flocculants can be added in order to increase the microalgal separation and the rate of sedimentation. Sedimentation tanks are not used widely in the industry but are a reliable method to concentrate microalgal suspensions to 1.5% TSS. The separation of microalgae by sedimentation tanks is an inexpensive process. However without the addition of flocculants, the reliability is low. The density of microalgal particles play an important role in the success of solids removal by gravity settling. Calculations performed by Edzwald 26 show that microalgae particles with low density do not settle well and are poorly removed by settling.

 Flotation as a method of removal of microalgae from aqueous solutions can be considered more advantageous and effective than sedimentation. Flotation can be described as a physiochemical type of gravity separation in which air or gas is bubbled through a solid-liquid suspension and the gaseous molecules are attached to the solid particles. These particles are carried to the surface of the liquid and accumulate as float, which can be removed. Flotation is dependent on the instability of the suspended particle; a lower instability will correspond to a higher air-particle contact. The size of the particles is important in flotation; the smaller the particle size, the more likely the particle can be levitated by the bubbles. A particle diameter of less than 500 μm can be used for flotation. Another important parameter is the particle capture by the bubble. The capturing process can be described as the product of two probabilities: the probability of the collision between a bubble and a particle and the probability of adhesion of the bubble and the particle after collision has occurred. It has been shown that there is a decrease in the probability of collision with decreasing particle size. There are three main flotation techniques that entail bubble generation. These are dispersed air flotation, dissolved air flotation, and electrolytic flotation. The first two are discussed in the following sections, while the review of electrolytic flotation can be found under Sec. III F in electrophoresis techniques.

 Dissolved air flotation is the most widely used flotation technique applied in industrial effluent treatment. The process of dissolved air flotation involves the reduction in pressure of a water stream that is presaturated with air (at pressures higher than atmospheric). The liquid containing the dissolved air is then injected at atmospheric pressure into a flotation tank through nozzles or needle valves. This generates bubbles that rise through the liquid and carry the suspended solids to the surface, which can then be skimmed off. A portion of the clarified liquid is separated and saturated with air to be recycled back into the flotation tank. A conventional dissolved air flotation unit is shown in Fig. 3. The size of bubbles produced can range from 10 to 100 μm with a mean of about 40 μm. The concentration of air and the diameter of the bubbles can affect the design and operation of the dissolved air flotation process. The air supply can be controlled by changing the saturator pressure or the recycle ratio. The size of the bubbles can be controlled by the saturator. To achieve small bubble size, the saturator pressure needs to operate above atmospheric pressure. The injection flow rate also influences the size of the bubbles. The injection flow rate must be large enough to provide a pressure drop but also prevent backflow and bubble growth on the surface of the pipes. Increasing the pressure will lead to a smaller bubble size. The degree of microalgae removal, i.e., the effluent clarification, is dependent on factors such as the recycle rate, air tank pressure, hydraulic retention time, and particle floating rate. The concentration of the slurry formed depends on the velocity of the skimmer and its height above the surface of the water. Microalgae separation by dissolved air flotation has often been combined with chemical flocculation ,46 and it is possible to obtain microalgal slurries of up to 6%. Autoflotation of microalgae by photosynthetically produced dissolved oxygen was studied after flocculation with alum or C-31 polymer. Microalgal removal of 80%–90% was achieved with the microalgal float concentrations reaching values greater than 6%. However, this method was limited to oxygen concentrations above 16 mg/l. A study carried out by Edzwald 26 looked into the removal of microalgae using dissolved air flotation compared to settling. The results also showed that microalgae removal by dissolved air flotation required pretreatment by flocculation. Dissolved air flotation and settling experiments were conducted at identical conditions. It was found that dissolved air flotation was more successful for microalgae removal. The efficiency of each technique was evaluated from the turbidity of the sample. The experiments showed that dissolved air flotation produced lower turbidities compared to settling (Fig. 3).

 Dispersed air flotation involves the formation of bubbles by a high speed mechanical agitator and an air injection system. Gas introduced at the top is mixed with liquid and allowed to pass through a disperser, which creates bubbles ranging from 700 to 1500 μm in diameter. A dispersed air flotation study was performed by Chen et al. Three types of surfactant were used as the collectors for microalgae removal: nonionic X-100, cationic N-Cetyl-N-N-N-trimethylammonium bromide, and anionic sodium dodecylsulfate. Surfactants or collectors are used to prepare the surface of the algae particles for flotation by air bubbles or to encourage microalgae agglomeration. They do this by changing the hydrophobicity of the particle, which will affect the likelihood of microalgae-bubble attachment. Experiments were conducted on the microalgal species Scenedesmus quadricauda. The results of the study showed that dispersed air flotation was successful for the removal of Scenedesmus quadricauda from water. The most effective collector was the cationic CTAB. The optimum pH range was 5–8. It was proposed that the role of the collector ions is to increase the resistance of bubble rupture. They may also migrate to the solid surface and increase the hydrophobicity of the solid particle, which may lead to electrical interactions between the solid particles and the gas bubbles. Electrostatic interactions are thought to play a crucial role in the efficiency of the collectors.

 One of the major disadvantages of using chemicals such as flocculants to aid microalgae recovery is that it involves the addition of chemicals into the system, which results in an increase in total dissolved solids . 48 There is also a risk of potential contamination of the medium, which is usually recycled to the bioreactor. A potential solution to this problem is to use electrolytic methods. This is because microalgae are able to behave as colloid particles and can be separated from water-based medium solutions by movement in an electric field. The advantages of using electrochemical processes include environmental compatibility, versatility, energy efficiency, safety, selectivity, and cost effectiveness . 50 Three common electrophoresis techniques are reviewed including electrolytic coagulation, electrolytic flotation, and electrolytic flocculation.
Electrolytic
 Electrocoagulation involves the use of both chemical and physical mechanisms to separate microalgal mass from water-based medium solutions. Reactive electrodes such as iron or aluminum are used. These electrodes produce metal ions that induce coagulation of the microalgal mass and result in the removal of suspended solids. The amount of metal dissolved to form ions is dependent on the amount of electricity that passes through the electrolytic solution. This can be described by the following equation:50w=itMnF,where w is the amount of the electrode metal that is dissolved (gram of M cm−2), i is the current density (A cm−2), t is the time (s), M is the relative molar mass of the metal electrode, n is the number of electrons in the oxidation/reduction reaction, and F is the Faraday’s constant (96 500 C mol−1). If the potential applied is from an external power source, the cathode material will undergo reduction and the anode oxidation. The reactions occurring at the electrodes are as follows:50 M refers to the metal of the electrode. At the anode,M(s)→M(aq)n++ne−,2H2O(l)→4H+(aq)+O2(g)+4e−.
At the cathode,M(aq)n++ne−→M(s),2H2O(l)+2e−→H2(g)+2OH−.
The process consists of three stages . 48,50
 Formation of coagulants due to the dissolution of the reactive anode electrode. In the case of iron or aluminum, the ions immediately hydrolyze to form polymeric iron or aluminum hydroxide.
 Destabilization of the particulate/colloid suspension.
 Aggregation of the destabilized suspension and the formation of microalgal flocs. This is achieved when the metal cations combine with the negatively charged microalgal cells that are carried toward the anode by electrophoretic motion. Aragon et al.49 conducted a study that compared the conventional microalgal recovery technique flocculation with electrolytic techniques. The chemical flocculant used for the conventional tests was aluminum sulfate. The experiment conducted was the typical jar test. For the electrolytic experiments, the electrodes used were made of aluminum with a total active surface area of 54 cm2. At periodic time intervals, samples were taken from the bottom of the experimental vessel and the absorbance measured in order to determine the microalgal concentration. The experiment was performed at various current intensities and potential differences. The results showed that electrolysis was superior to flocculation. This decision was based on the fact that electrolysis had a lower cost (the cost of energy was lower than the cost of flocculants), shorter time for separation to occur, and a lower probability that the microalgal aggregate will be contaminated with metallic hydroxides. Also, only small current strengths were needed, which correspond to very low current densities. It was also found that there was a relationship between the potential difference applied and the time needed for electrolysis to occur in order to achieve a certain level of microalgal separation. Azarian et al.51 studied the effect of continuous flow electrocoagulation in the application of microalgae removal from industrial wastewater. The experiments consisted of five aluminum electrodes in the shape of flat plates (three anodes and two cathodes). The choice of material was based on the fact that electrode dissolution would introduce a flocculant into the process. The results of the experiments conducted showed that the application of higher power inputs led to an increased microalgae removal rate. An increase in power also resulted in a decrease in the time required to achieve separation as well as an increase in the amount of flocculating agent produced. However, using a higher power also resulted in an increase in temperature, which may damage the process. The change in pH was insignificant.
Electrolytic
 Electroflotation is similar to electrocoagulation where active metal anodes are used as flocculating agents. However in electroflotation, the cathode is made from an inactive metal (electrochemically nondepositing) that generates hydrogen bubbles from water electrolysis [Eq. (5)]. These bubbles adhere to the microalgal flocs and carry them to the surface. Alfafara et al.52 investigated the electrolytic removal of microalgae in batch and continuous reactors by flotation. The electrodes used in the experiments were a polyvalent aluminum anode and titanium alloy cathode. The results for the batch system showed that increasing the electrical power increased the rate of chlorophyll a removal and decreased the electrolysis time. The concentration of microalgae removed from electrolysis was directly proportional to the amount of chlorophyll a measured. A limitation of using high electrical power was the increase in temperature observed, although this temperature increase was not significant at lower electrical power values. A slight pH increase was also observed. It was also found that the introduction of mixing into the system decreased the chlorophyll a removal efficiency. Without mixing, the generation of gas bubbles is enough to create turbulence. At higher shear forces, the gas bubbles that may be trapped in the microalgal flocs can disperse, leading to the destruction of microalgal flocs. It was observed that the intensity of natural mixing increased with power, which can be explained by the increase in gas evolution due to the increase in power. In the continuous system, the experiments were conducted at different flow rates and electrical currents. The concentration of chlorophyll a in the influent and effluent were measured at steady state. In comparison with the batch system, the temperature and pH of the continuous system reached the steady state values. It was found that the dilution effect of the water during the electrolysis process was a good buffer against problems such as increases in temperature and pH. The same relationships between electrical power, time, flocculant production, and microalgal removal in the batch system were also found in the continuous system. The disadvantages of electroflotation include scaling of the cathode and the high cost of power rectifiers. Sandbank and Shelef 53 conducted a study on different microalgal recovery techniques such as flocculation, dissolved air flotation, flotation, and electroflotation. Electroflotation was performed with stainless steel titanium dioxide electrodes, which were orientated to cover the bottom of the unit. It was found that electroflotation was not the best choice for microalgal recovery, but it may be preferred for marine microalgal species.
Electrolytic
 Electrolytic flocculation does not involve the use of sacrificial electrodes; hence no flocculants are required. The principle of electrolytic flocculation is based on the movement of negatively charged microalgae toward the anode. Upon reaching the anode, the microalgal particles lose their charge and are able to form aggregates. This can be seen in Fig. 4, which shows a schematic diagram of an electrolytic flocculation unit. Electrolysis of water produces bubbles that can aid the microalgal flocs to rise to the surface. A study conducted by Poleman et al.54 investigated electrolytic flocculation of microalgae. The experiments were carried out in a 100 l vessel with electrodes arranged vertically. Different setups were tested with varying distance between cathode and anode, voltages, and current densities. The results showed that electrolytic flocculation was successful in removing microalgae from dilute suspensions, having removed 80%–95% of microalgae in 35 min. Decreasing the voltage led to slower microalgae removal rate, but it had the advantage of consuming less energy. Decreasing the total surface area of the electrodes and increasing the distance between electrodes also consumed less energy. The main advantages of this process are that there is no need for flocculants and that minimum energy is consumed by using the optimum potential difference, electrode surface area, and distance between electrodes. A disadvantage of this process is that the cathodes are prone to fouling (Fig. 4).
A large amount of studies has been completed on the harvesting and recovery techniques of microalgal cells in dilute suspensions. Due to the differences in the biology of microalgal species, it is difficult to name one method as superior. The choice of which harvesting technique to use depends on the species of microalgae and the final product desired. Desired microalgal properties that simplify harvesting are large cell size, high specific gravity compared to the medium, and reliable autoflocculation. In addition to these, the optimum harvesting method chosen for a particular microalgal species should have minimum energy requirements and should be as economical as possible. The main harvesting techniques are summarized in Table II. Centrifugation is seen as the most efficient recovery technique, yet the energy and capital costs associated are unappealing. Flocculation is also a very efficient technique that is currently applied in industries. Freshwater microalgae flocculation has been immensely studied throughout the years. However, there is a dearth of information and comparative studies for marine microalgae. With growing concern about freshwater resources in many parts of the world, further research on the processing of marine microalgae would be very beneficial.