Graphene sheets that are now routinely obtained by the exfoliation/reduction of graphite oxide exhibit Raman spectra unlike traditional graphene systems. The general attributes of the Raman spectra of these ‘wrinkled graphene’ are first reaffirmed by evaluating the spectra of samples prepared by seven different exfoliation-reduction methods. These graphene sheets exhibit highly broadened D and G Raman bands and in addition, have a modulated bump in place of the conventional 2D (G′) band. It is shown that the high wavenumber ‘bump’ can be resolved into the conventional 2D band and several defect activated peaks such as G*, D+D′ and 2D′. The broad G band could also be deconvoluted into the actual G band and the D′ band, thereby attributing the broadening in the G band to the presence of this defect activated band. Two additional modes, named as D* at 1190 cm-1 and D** at ∼1500 cm-1 could be identified. These peculiar features in the Raman spectrum of ‘graphene’ are attributed to the highly disordered and wrinkled (defective) morphology of the sheets. The affect of defects are further augmented due to the finite crystallite size of these graphene sheets. The dispersion in the band positions and peak intensities with respect to the laser energy are also demonstrated.
The term, ‘Graphene’ was coined by Boehm et al. in 1986 and was first used by Mouras and co-workers in 1987 to describe a single layer in graphite intercalation compounds . 1,2 Currently, it is used to describe an ‘isolated’ monolayer of carbon atoms arranged in a honeycomb like pattern. Though there were several attempts to grow graphene, isolated single layer graphene (SLG) could be extracted only in 2004. This discovery is credited to Novoselov et al.3 who showed that a defect free graphene monolayer could be extracted, albeit in small quantities by mechanical exfoliation of highly oriented graphite using a scotch tape. Several unique phenomena such as quantum spin Hall effect, ballistic transport, suppression of the weak localization, deviation from the adiabatic Born-Oppenheimer approximation and high charge carrier mobility have been observed. Some of the other strategies currently being used are chemical vapor deposition (CVD) or epitaxial growth of graphene on desired substrates or post synthesis transfer onto them. Intercalation-exfoliation of graphite ,8 liquid phase exfoliation or direct conversion of graphite by different routes such as ultrasonication in various solvents etc.9,10 have also been developed. In a seminal paper in 2006, Schneipp et al.11 showed that few layer graphene sheets can be obtained by thermal splitting of graphite oxide (GO). The basic principle involved in this method is to increase the interlayer spacing of graphite by introducing functional groups and then removing these groups by providing a rapid thermal gradient. The thermal treatment liberates gases from GO. If the rate of evolution of gases is greater than that of diffusion of gases, the pressure developed exfoliates and reduces the sheets to graphene ,12 else only reduction occurs. These graphene sheets are wrinkled, have high surface area and are electrically conducting. Subsequently, several exfoliation-reduction procedures have been developed for the synthesis of graphene from GO. These procedures can be classified as gasothermal, 13–16 solvothermal 17,18 and photothermal 19,20 methods based on the exfoliation-reduction conditions. The precursor GO can be in solid powder form or dispersed in solvents. The graphene products obtained from these procedures are wrinkled, disordered to varying extents and have different oxygen contents. These aspects affect their electronic properties significantly. Consequently, these structures are not suitable for electronic applications but are suited for a multitude of other applications. 21–24 Several different nomenclatures exist for these structures in literature such as functionalized graphene sheets, reduced graphene, wrinkled graphene, exfoliated graphene etc. Following the works of Reich and Thomson ,25 Dresselhaus and group ,26,27 Ferrari et al.28,29 and many others, the Raman spectrum of graphite and SLG is fairly well understood, both theoretically and experimentally. The spectra consist of three prominent characteristic peaks, namely the D band, the G band, and the G′ (or 2D) band. A few less intense peaks called the D′, D+G, D+D′, G+D′, 2D′ etc. are observed in some cases. The presence or absence of these bands, their relative shapes, positions and intensity ratios provide distinguishable information regarding the sample being studied 26,28 and therefore are fundamental in characterizing graphene. However, the Raman spectra of the relatively newer systems such as wrinkled graphene, reduced graphene etc. have not been adequately addressed. Consequently, there is a lot of discrepancy in the literature over the Raman spectra of graphenes obtained from GO. Some reports show equally intense D and G bands with no 2D band or a highly broadened and low intense 2D band. In certain other reports, the 2D band is similar to that of turbostratic graphite. In many reports, the 2D band is neither mentioned nor discussed. Overall, the Raman spectra of these graphene structures are significantly different from that of the traditional SLG or even the perfectly stacked few layer graphene. In the light of these observations, a systematic evaluation of the Raman spectra of graphenes obtained from GO is necessary. Hence, in this article, the general pattern of the Raman spectra of graphene synthesized from GO is first established. For this purpose, graphene sheets are synthesized by seven different existing techniques and their Raman spectra are analyzed in detail. Subsequently, the appearance of multiple defect activated bands, their superposition, the dispersion in band positions and intensities, etc. have been demonstrated in these systems for the first time. The variations in the Raman spectra with incident laser energy, power and exposure time have also been discussed.
Purified natural graphite (SP 1, 99.99 % purity, 45 μm) was purchased from Bay Carbon, USA. This graphite was used for Raman studies as well as for the synthesis of graphene. All other reagents and chemicals were procured from Sigma Aldrich or Alfa Aesar, USA. Graphite oxide (GO) was prepared by Hummers method as given in our earlier report. Briefly, 2 g of graphite was added to 46 ml of conc. H2SO4 under stirring in an ice bath. 1 g NaNO3 and 6 g KMnO4 were added slowly, one after the other. After the suspension reached room temperature, 92 ml of water was added. This mixture was diluted to 280 ml using warm water. 3% H2O2 was added until the solution turned bright yellow. This suspension was filtered and the filter cake was washed with warm water, repeatedly. The residue was diluted using water and the resulting suspension was centrifuged. The final product was dried under vacuum. Few layer graphene were synthesized by exfoliating GO under different conditions. Thermal exfoliation was done by inserting a quartz boat containing GO into a preheated (1050 °C) furnace with Ar atmosphere for 30s.11,16 The sample is named TEG. Vacuum exfoliation was carried out by placing GO in a vacuum oven (∼10−3 mbar) and heating it to ∼200 °C. This sample is called VEG. Hydrogen exfoliation was carried out by rapidly heating GO to ∼200 °C in the presence of hydrogen to give HEG. For chemical exfoliation (CEG), GO was dispersed in water and 1 vol. % hydrazine hydrate was added. The solution was refluxed at ∼100 °C for required time. The hydrazine vapors produced split the GO layers and reduce them to graphene. For microwave exfoliation (MEG),18 GO was dispersed in ethylene glycol and exposed to microwaves (800 W, 4 min) in a microwave oven. Laser exfoliated graphene (LEG)19 was synthesized by exposing GO to intense laser in the Raman spectrometer itself (532 nm, Nd: YAG). Sun exfoliation 20 was done as reported. In brief, GO powders were spread in a petri dish and covered with a watch glass. Using a magnifying lens, sunlight was concentrated on GO powders. This resulted in exfoliation at the spot. The focused spot was then moved over the entire sample to exfoliate the entire sample. This sample is named as SEG. Freshly prepared (1 day old) samples were used for the synthesis of all the above types of graphene. For comparison, graphene like materials were also synthesized by other methods. Planar multi layer graphene nanoplatelets were synthesized by giving thermal shock (1050 °C, 30s) to acid intercalated graphite (conc. H2SO4: conc. HNO3, 3:1 by vol.) followed by liquid phase exfoliation. Nano graphite (nGr) was synthesized by balling milling graphite at 300 rpm. Rest time of 5 min was provided every 30 min. The ball to weight ratio was maintained at 16:1. The milling time was varied from 12 to 24 h.

 Powder X-ray diffraction studies were done using a PANalytical X’PERT Pro X-ray diffractometer which has a nickel-filtered Cu Kα radiation as the X-ray source. The scanning was done in the 2θ range of 5° to 90° with a step size of 0.016°. UV-visible absorption spectra of GO and derived graphene were recorded on JASCO Corp. V-570 spectrophotometer. The samples were dissolving in ethanol at a concentration of 1 mg/mL. Functional groups identification was carried out using PerkinElmer FT-IR spectrometer in the range 500 – 4000 cm−1. The samples were prepared by KBr pellet method. Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) and high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images were obtained using FEI QUANTA 300 and Technai F-20 S-Twin instruments. XPS analysis was performed with SPECS GmbH spectrometer (Phoibos 100MCD Energy Analyzer) using Al Kα radiation (1486.6 eV). The residual pressure inside the analysis chamber was in 10−10 mbar range. The spectrometer was calibrated by using photoemission lines of Ag (Ag 3d3/2 = 367 eV with reference to Fermi level). Peaks were recorded with constant pass energy of 20 eV at 100W power. XPS signals were analyzed using CASA XPS software. The samples for XPS were prepared by dispersing the samples in water and drop casting on Si substrates. Electrical conductivity of the samples were measured using 4 probe arrangement connected to Keithley 2400 source meter and interfaced to a computer using LabView. The Raman spectroscopic measurements were carried out using two different systems. A WITec alpha 300 Confocal Raman system equipped with a Nd:YAG laser was used for 532 nm (2.33 eV) excitation. A HORIBA JOBIN YVON HR800UV Raman spectrometer with He-Ne laser and an Argon ion laser were used for 633 (1.96 eV) and 488 nm (2.54 eV) excitation. The laser intensities were kept low to avoid any laser induced damage. High resolution scanning electron microscopy images were obtained using FESEM (FEI QUANTA 3D) system and high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) was carried out using TECNAI F-20 (S-Twin). Powder X-ray diffraction studies were carried out using a PANalytical X’PERT Pro X-ray diffractometer with nickel-filtered Cu Kα radiation as the X-ray source in the 2θ range of 5° to 90° with a step size of 0.016°. Curve fitting for the Raman data were carried out using Microcal Origin 8.0 software. Two different fitting profiles were used, a Lorentz function and a Pseudo Voigt function. In general, fitting was better with Lorentz function rather than a Pseudo Voigt function.
Graphite
 Graphite can be ‘broken down’ to graphene by several approaches. The ideal SLG can be obtained by micromechanical cleavage of highly oriented pyrolytic graphite. Structures intermediate to graphite and SLGs can be obtained by different methods as outlined in the previous section. The differences in the synthesis procedures can result in varied morphologies. Fig. 1 presents the morphology of different structures derived from graphite. Graphite has a highly ordered and layered structure as shown in Fig. 1(a). Fig. 1(b) shows the morphology of ball milled graphite or ‘nano-graphite.’ It consists of highly defective spherical particles which is a direct consequence of ball milling. The sample shown in Fig. 1(c) has large ordered crystallites as well as smaller disordered materials. Such structures have been named as graphene nanoplatelets or multi layer graphene in literature. On the other hand, graphene sheets obtained from GO by most of the methods have a wrinkled, fluffy and disordered morphology in the powder form. Fig. 1(d) shows the morphology of a typical graphene obtained from GO. Images of other graphene obtained can be seen in our earlier work. These wrinkled graphenes are of main interest in the present work. For completeness, the Raman spectrum of graphite is discussed first which can be understood in terms of the Raman spectrum of a SLG. A brief overview of the Raman spectrum of SLG is presented in electronic supplementary information. As the number of layers tends from a SLG towards that of crystalline graphite via AB Bernal stacking, the G and 2D bands evolve significantly. Numerous reports show that as the number of layers increase, the intensity of the G band increases significantly, while that of the 2D band decreases . 28,29,42,43 In addition the shape of the 2D band has a two peak profile rather than a single Lorentzian as in SLG. To reconfirm these aspects, the Raman spectrum of graphite was recorded at different laser energies, as shown in Fig. 2. The G band is located at ∼1584 cm−1 and is clearly more intense than the 2D band. In addition, the 2D band has a two peak profile, the intense 2D1 band and a low energy shoulder called the 2D2 band (Fig. 2, left inset). This splitting is understood to be due to the splitting of π electron dispersion energies caused by the interaction between the neighbouring graphitic planes . 28 Further, the 2D band position is supposed to be dispersive due to its double resonant origin. However, in the present work, we found that the 2D1 band is dispersive with a variation of about 77 ± 3 cm−1/eV but not the entire 2D band. The 2D2 band position, on the other hand, varies from spot to spot depending on the number of layers and c-axis stacking order of the underlying sample. The 2D1 band has a FWHM of ∼37 cm−1 and a peak intensity ratio, I2D1/IG < 0.5. The D band appears, as in a SLG, only in defective/disordered samples or at the edges. Any physical or chemical treatments which cause defects in pristine graphite will result in the appearance of the D band. In the present graphite sample, the D band intensity is negligibly small. Nevertheless, the D band shows dispersive behaviour at the rate of 39 cm−1/eV, which is half of that of 2D1 band. The dispersive nature of D and 2D1 band can be inferred from right inset in Fig. 2. It is important to note the 2D2 band position depends on the number of layers and stacking order of the graphitic sample. Any modification of the graphitic surface is clearly identifiable via the 2D2 band (entire 2D band in some cases). In a perfectly A-B stacked few layer graphene, by about 5 – 6 layers, the 2D peak starts exhibiting a two peak profile. From top down point of view, this indicates that the 2D band in graphite maintains a two peak profile down to 5 or 6 layers. However, in samples with high c-axis disorder, the two peak profile of graphite is not maintained. Cancado et al.43 have shown that as disorder increases, the 2D2 shoulder shift upwards and finally merges into the 2D1 band. As a result, the 2D band exhibits a single peak profile. This does not indicate the formation of two dimensional graphene but rather the onset of turbostraticity and the loss of three dimensional ordering. For the sample to be identified as SLG, along with the single peak nature of 2D band, its intensity must be higher than that of the G band.41
Wrinkled 
 As discussed earlier, a common route for the synthesis of graphene from graphite is based on exfoliation-reduction of GO. In this work, seven different established ‘exfoliation-reduction’ techniques have been adopted. The graphene structures obtained by these methods are collectively named as few layer wrinkled graphene (FLwG) for further discussions. The FLwGs have been characterized by different techniques. The details are given in the electronic supplementary information. Figs. 3(a) and 3(b) show the morphology of two FLwGs as observed using TEM. The sheet like nature of FLwGs is clearly visible from the TEM images. However, the graphene sheets are highly disordered and contain large amount of corrugations or wrinkles on their surface. These wrinkles are not point defects but are extended surface defects formed due to the folding or twisting of the few layer graphene sheets. These wrinkles can cause deviation from the sp2/planar character expected for graphene. Furthermore, since these wrinkles are randomly distributed on the surface, the inter-defect (Ld) distance is not constant in these samples. In comparison, in the FESEM images shown in Fig. 1(d), Figs. 3(b) and 3(d), the graphene sheets appear to be arranged in a random and disordered three dimensional porous architecture. This difference of appearance in the powder form (FESEM) and dispersed form (TEM) is fundamental to graphene sheets synthesized from GO. This behavior is unique only to wrinkled graphene and no other carbon nanostructure. The TEM morphology, nevertheless, confirms that these materials are graphene like materials and not amorphous carbons. The Raman spectra (ELaser = 532 nm) of GO and the seven different FLwGs are presented in Fig. 4. It is to be noted that these Raman spectra are for the poweder samples. GO has intense D and G bands and a flat 2D region. The D band is more intense than the G band (ID/IG = 1.1). The FLwGs obtained by the exfoliation-reduction of GO consist of partially healed carbon basal planes due to the removal of functional groups. Hence, their Raman spectra is different from that of GO. The Raman spectra of the FLwGs have a similar pattern but are unlike those of the traditional graphene systems. The FLwGs exhibit an intense G band at 1588 cm−1 and an equally intense D band at 1352 cm−1. In addition, these bands are highly broadened with average FWHM of ∼159 cm−1 and 76 cm−1, respectively, resulting in their overlap. While the broadening in D band can be due to the disorder/defects in the samples, the broadening in the G band is unusual. Furthermore, at the far wave number side (represented as the 2D or G′ region, 2400 to 3250 cm−1), only a modulated bump can be seen. This is sharp contrast to the 2D bands in traditional graphene and even graphite. The traditional SLG exhibits a narrow single peak whereas graphite has a broader two peak profile. Based on the earlier discussions on the 2D band, a single low intense 2D peak is expected in FLwGs since they have ∼5 layers 41 and are also highly disordered along the c-axis. But only a bump like region is seen in the high wavenumber region. Further, the shape of the modulated bump seems to vary between graphene samples. Some samples show a broad single peak while others show distinguishable peaks. This variation could be due to variation in amount of remnant functional groups or due to defects. Though interesting, the minor variations seen in the shape of the 2D band due to different synthesis conditions is not the scope of the work. Rather, it is the general shape of the 2D band itself that is focus of the work. As can be seen from Fig. 4, the 2D band of FLwGs is different from the conventional 2D band 41 of SLG. Also, the D and G bands are highly broadened and equally intense which is not seen in SLG. These aspects are explored in detail in this work.
Effects of physical and chemical induced 
 The unusual powder Raman spectra of FLwGs is probably a direct consequence of its disordered and wrinkled (defective) morphology. Recently, Ferreira et al.44 have shown that at high point defect densities in SLG or few layer graphene (introduced by Ar+ bombardment at 1013 Ar+/cm2) the 2D band reduces in intensity considerably and at defect densities >1014 Ar+/cm2 the 2D band is replaced by a modulated bump. This behavior has been attributed to two competing mechanisms wherein the increase of defect first increases the intensity of the defect activated bands. At high defect concentration, the hexagonal network of graphene is disturbed which causes the suppression of the 2D band. On similar lines, we found that defects can have significant impact on the shape of the 2D band of graphite. Fig. 5 shows the Raman spectra of nano-graphite (nGr), which is obtained by ball-milling of large graphite flakes for different durations. The ball-milling procedure breaks the large crystallites into smaller particles and also introduces significant amount of defects, as can be seen from Fig. 1(b). The 2D band changes from a two peak profile to a single peak after ball-milling for 12 h. After 24 h, the 2D band is suppressed and a bump like region emerges, similar to that observed in FLwGs. Since, no chemical treatments were given, the peculiar 2D band shape cannot be due to functional groups and must be due to defects. This shows that ‘physical’ defects can cause the emergence of the ‘bump’ even in graphite. Hence, it can be said that the modulated 2D band in FLwGs is mainly due to defects. Chemically induced defects can also affect the 2D band. For instance, GO which is a chemically converted form of graphite shows no peaks in the 2D region at all (Fig. 6(a)) since it is and highly defective structure consisting of functional groups intercalated between the graphitic layers. When GO is exfoliated or reduced to FLwGs, the 2D region appears as shown in Fig. 4. However, if FLwGs are treated with concentrated acid, the 2D band gets suppressed, as seen be seen in Fig. 6(b). This treatment causes severe defects to the graphene sheets, thereby increasing the defects. The damaged morphology of these two samples can be seen in FESEM figures in the supplementary file. As a consequence of the increase in defects, the D band intensity also increases (ID/IG ∼ 1.05 for f-HEG and 1.2 for GO). In another set of experiments, the amount of defects in graphene sheets is controlled by varying the reduction time in chemical exfoliation method. Fig. 6(b) shows the Raman spectra of CEG synthesized by varying the reduction time, CEG1 (12 h) and CEG2 (24 h). The parent GO has a flat 2D region as seen in Fig. 6(a). Upon exfoliation and reduction, the 2D region appears. With increase in reduction time, the D band intensity increases and the 2D region is further suppressed. These two examples show that the increase of chemically induced defects beyond a particular amount can also suppress the 2D band. It is important to record the Raman spectra of GO at very low laser intensity. At high laser intensities, local (in-situ) exfoliation-reduction can occur causing the Raman spectra of GO to be similar to that of FLwGs. The Raman spectrum of LEG is shown in Fig. 3(g), to assert this fact. This may lead to wrong interpretation of Raman spectra of GO. Based on the above discussions, it can be argued that the surface defects in the form of wrinkles in as synthesized FLwGs can cause the suppression of the 2D band. The large amount of defects and disorder can also cause the emergence of many defect activated bands. These band may merge due to broadening, effectively giving a bump like shape for the 2D band.
Defect
 In order to finally prove the influence of defects, the presence of the defect activated peaks in the Raman spectra of FLwGs must be established. Hence, attempts were made to deconvolute the 2D region into its possible constituent peaks. Fig. 7 shows multiple Lorentzians peak fit for the 2D region in VEG, a typical FLwG. Four Lorentzians could be fit successfully. The peak positions are 2445, 2690, 2925, and 3160 cm−1. Based on the literature on the Raman spectra of SLGs,27,29 the first two signals at 2445 cm−1 and 2690 cm−1 can be assigned to G* and 2D (G′) Raman modes, respectively without any ambiguity. The band at 2925 cm−1 has been assigned to D+D′45 mode in some articles whereas some other reports assign this peak to the D+G mode. Similarly, the peak at 3160 cm−1 has been assigned to 2D′ and G+D′. Irrespective of the nomenclature, all these bands broaden to a large extent in FLwGs, effectively resulting in the bump like region. D+D′ and D+G are both defect activated and hence will be present only in samples with sufficient defects . 45 2D′ is not defect activated because of momentum conservation restrictions . 45 The 2D′ band is present even in graphite (Fig. 2) but has very low intensity. The combination modes described above involve D′ band. This band is not generally seen in FLwGs which is probably due to the broadening of the G band. Hence, deconvolution of the D and G bands was carried out as shown in Fig. 8. A total of five peaks could be fit as shown. The peaks centered at 1353 cm−1 and 1586 cm−1 corresponds to the conventional D and G bands. The broadening in the G band at the higher wavenumber side is due to the presence of the D′ band at 1610 cm−1. The occurrence of this peak in FLwGs has not been demonstrated earlier. However, this is not surprising since FLwGs are highly defective structures and hence the D′ bands can exist. Interestingly, two additional peaks could be fit at ∼1190 cm−1 and ∼1500 cm−1. These bands are named as D* and D**, respectively. The origin of these bands in FLwGs is not clear. It should be noted, however, that these peaks have been found in disordered carbons. Some reports have attributed the D* peak to sp3 rich phase of disordered amorphous carbons . 47,48 The D** peak can be due to contributions from the phonon density of states in finite size graphitic crystals or due to C-H vibrations in hydrogenated carbons . 48,49 However, Ferrari and Robertson 50 have argued that these two peaks are the sum and difference of C=C stretching and CH wagging modes of trans-polyacetylene (alternating chain of sp2 carbons with a single hydrogen bonded to carbon) in nanocrystalline diamond and not due to sp3 carbons. Interestingly, these two peaks could also be identified in the Raman spectrum of nano-graphite (nGr), which was obtained by ball milling of large graphite flakes. This suggest that these bands in FLwGs may not due to remnant functional groups or sp3 carbons, but rather due to finite size of crystallites and consequent increase in defects. Further studies are required to ascertain the origin of these peaks. The different bands in FLwGs exhibit dispersion in their positions i.e. the position varies with laser energy. Three lasers were used for this study viz. 632 nm (1.96 eV), 532 nm (2.33 eV) and 488 nm (2.54 eV). Fig. 9 presents the dispersion behavior of the various bands in ‘gasothermally’ exfoliated graphene, namely TEG, HEG and VEG. It was observed that the D band position in TEG, HEG and VEG shifts towards higher wave numbers at ∼46, 48 and 47 cm−1/eV, respectively. The 2D band which is the second order of the D band shows blue shift at almost double the rate of the D band, as expected. The dispersion factor (S) for the 2D band in TEG, HEG and VEG are 98, 98 and 102 cm−1/eV, respectively. Surprisingly, the G band shows an unusual dispersion at the rate of −29, −28 and −29 cm−1/eV in TEG, HEG and VEG, respectively. This is unexpected since the G band is generally invariant. This apparent contradiction can be resolved by attributing the dispersion to the D′ band. For e.g. in HEG, the D′ band positions determined by deconvolution of the D and G bands are 1617 cm−1, 1604 cm−1 and 1596 cm−1 under 1.96, 2.33 and 2.54 eV laser, respectively. This gives a dispersion factor, SD′ = −36 cm−1/eV. However, the actual G band (G0 band) also shows a low dispersion of SG0 ∼ −11 cm−1/eV. Ni et al.51 have recently shown that the G band in twisted bilayer graphene can become double resonant. Since FLwGs contain sheets that are twisted and folded as seen in the FESEM micrographs, the actual G band may become double resonant. A direct consequence of the double resonance process is dispersion in band positions. This can explain the dispersion observed in the actual G band. Further theoretical and experimental proof is required to validate this and is beyond the scope of this work. As a result of the dispersion in the D′ and G0 bands, the resultant G peak also shows dispersion. The dispersion in G band can be obtained by a linear combination of the dispersions in the constituent bands, i.e. SG = a1SD′ + a2SG0. If we use a1 = 2/3 and a2 = 1/3, an SG of −28 cm−1/eV is obtained which matches with the observed value. The dispersion for the combination mode 2D′ at 3200 cm−1 was found to be, S2D′ = − 62 cm−1/eV which is nearly equal to 2 x SD′. The D+ D′ (or D+G) mode in HEG exhibits a dispersion of 34 cm−1/eV. However, this cannot be expressed as the sum of the dispersion in the constituent peaks, since for this peak there is no backscattering restriction. The peak intensities of the different bands in FLwGs also show dispersion behaviour. Fig. 10(a) shows the Raman spectra of HEG under three different laser energies. Clearly the D band increases in intensity (with respect to the G band) with increasing wavelength or decreasing energy of the laser. Similarly, the 2D band intensity increases with respect to D+D′ band upon increase in wavelength. The dispersion behaviour has been plotted in Fig. 10(b). Similar behaviour is observed in TEG and VEG also. By comparing the dispersion relations in band positions and intensity, the evolution of shape of the higher wave number bump with energy can be understood. With increasing laser energy (or decreasing wavelength), the D+D′ band blue shifts. The 2D band blue shifts at almost triple the rate, eventually causing the merging of the two peaks. The 2D band also decreases in intensity with laser energy. Thus, the modulated bump observed under 1.96 eV merge into a single broad peak under 2.54 eV laser. Finally, it must be noted that the spectra of FLwGs does not vary significantly from spot to spot as long as the reduction-exfoliation is complete. The time of exposure to laser and its power does not alter their Raman spectra, within the limit of our measurements . 41 At higher powers however, damage to the sample could be observed under the microscope and in the spectra as well. Also, the number of layers in FLwGs samples may affect their Raman spectra. In the present work, since the number of layers in FLwGs is 5 or more, the layer number may not have a significant effect on the 2D band. Further work is necessary to evaluate the effect of layers.
The complexity of the Raman spectra of wrinkled graphene sheets obtained by reduction-exfoliation of GO has been demonstrated. The presence of wrinkles or surface defects results in the activation of multiple defect activated peaks. These peaks broaden and merge due to the large amount of defects, thereby, giving rise to the modulated 2D band in wrinkled graphene. The large amount of defects also cause the emergence of new modes, D* and D** which cause the broadening of D and G bands. The dispersion in band position and intensity ratio has also been demonstrated in the case of wrinkled graphene.