We show that for metal/graphene/dielectric sandwich structures, charge doping in graphene depends on both the work functions of the metal and the dielectric. Using C-1s core level photoemission spectroscopy we determine the charge doping in graphene for one-sided metal contacts as well as for sandwich structures that are commonly used in graphene devices. The measured Fermi-level shifts are in good agreement with a model that predicts that the difference in charge doping for graphene on a metal compared to graphene sandwiched between a metal and dielectric is given by ΔEF ≈ 0.44 × √(Φmetal − Φdielectric).
The contact resistance between a metal and graphene affects device performances that use graphene as the conducting channel, for example, in field effect transistors (FETs). One reason for high contact resistances is the Fermi-level shift in graphene at metal contacts due to interface charge doping effects . 8 This causes a band bending in the graphene at the edge of the metal contact and consequently resulting in a charge injection barrier. On the other hand, this band bending may be exploited for separation of photo excited charges to generate a photocurrent. Thus, it is critical to understand the metal induced charge doping and the associated shift of the Fermi-level at the graphene/metal interface. Here, we show that the Fermi-level position can be determined from regular x-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS), and importantly, while our experiments show that the pure metal/graphene interface is well described by previous density functional theory (DFT) computation ,14 the technologically more important case of a metal contact on supported graphene may be significantly modified by the support. Consequently, the choice of the support material is equally important as the metal in tuning the contact resistance. Low electron density of states close to the Dirac point of graphene cause a significant shift of the Fermi-level even for small charge transfers to graphene. This property is also known as the variable work function of graphene because shifts of the Fermi-level by several tenths of an eV relative to the Dirac point due to charge doping, changes the energy-separation between the Fermi-level and the vacuum level (work function) by the same amount. The variable work function behavior of graphene has been exploited in potential new electronic devices such as the recently demonstrated barristor device. However, it is not just the work function that is changed due to a shift of the Fermi-level, but all other electronic energy levels that are referenced to the Fermi-level are shifting likewise. This basic relationship between the shift in the Fermi-level and the C-1s core level is illustrated in Fig. 1. The relative shifts of the energy levels have implications for interpretation of spectroscopic measurements on graphene and importantly may also be exploited for measuring the charge doping level in graphene. The relationship between Fermi-level shift and the C-1s core-level shifts due to a rigid bandshift has also been demonstrated for graphite intercalation compounds . 17 By comparing C-1s peak shifts with computed Fermi-level shifts for graphene/metal interfaces we show that C-1s peak shifts can be related to metal-contact induced charge doping of graphene. Subsequently, we utilize this relationship between C-1s shifts and Fermi-level position in graphene to determine charge doping effects at complex metal/graphene/dielectric sandwich structures. The doping of graphene by metallic contacts is well established. In first approximation, this can be described by charge transfer between the metal and graphene due to differences in work functions. More detailed DFT simulations suggest that the dipole formed due to charge redistribution at the interface between the metal and graphene shifts the charge neutrality point (i.e., the metal work function for which no charges are transferred to graphene) to a metal work function that is ∼0.9 eV higher than that of graphene. The charge doping of graphene on metal surfaces and the accompanying Fermi-level shift relative to the Dirac-point has been confirmed for some metals by angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) of the graphene π-band at the Brillouin-zone K-point. Of particular interest to this paper, a shift of the Dirac point of ∼0.3 eV for Pt,19 ∼0.1 eV for Ir,20 and ∼−0.3eV for Cu21 was reported. Although, ARPES is the most direct measurement of the Fermi-level position relative to the Dirac point, the special sample-conditions that need to be met limit this technique to fundamental surface science investigations. In general, for ARPES measurements graphene single crystals are needed and the graphene should be close to the surface, i.e., buried interfaces are difficult to study by ARPES. It was also suggested that peak shifts in Raman scattering can be used to extract doping levels in graphene. However, convolution of peak shifts due to doping with contributions from lattice strain may make Raman spectroscopy challenging for measuring doping levels reliably. On the other hand, measuring the C-1s peak position in XPS is straightforward. With an accurate calibration of the electron energy analyzer, for example, by using highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) as a reference sample, small shifts in the C-1s positions can be detected. In XPS, the C-1s peak position is referenced to the Fermi-level. Consequently, a shift in the Fermi-level that changes the graphene work function also shifts the C-1s core level by the same amount as is schematically illustrated in Fig. 1. XPS is, however, not without limitations. Strongly interacting metals would cause chemical shifts that may dominate the C-1s peak position. Therefore, in this paper we only consider weakly interacting metals, i.e. Cu, Pt, Al, and Ir that maintain the Dirac-cone of graphene. In most realistic device structures, graphene would be supported on an insulating substrate and metals are deposited to make electrical contacts. Therefore, it is very important to know how the charge doping of graphene is affected by a dielectric or semiconducting substrate. In order to prepare an as-clean-as-possible interface, we avoid mechanical and/or solution transfers of graphene onto dielectric/semiconducting substrates. Instead we inverse the dielectric/graphene/metal structure by using graphene directly grown by CVD on weakly interacting metals, i.e. Cu, Pt, and Ir, and deposit a metal-oxide on top. Graphene on Pt(111) and Ir(111) are grown in ultra high vacuum (UHV) by exposure to ethylene at 700 °C and 850 °C, respectively. Graphene on copper is grown on polycrystalline copper foils in a tube furnace using a methane/hydrogen mixture. The inert nature of graphene enables us to transport the graphene covered surface through air. A brief UHV annealing is sufficient to desorb any contamination from the surface. The direct CVD-growth is limited to late transition metals. For characterizing the Al/graphene interface, which is of interest because of the low work function of Al, we resorted to the approach of intercalating Al after graphene has been grown on Ni(111). Since Al alloys very easily with the Ni-substrate care has to be taken in the intercalation process to not exceed a critical temperature. We have thoroughly studied this intercalation process and substrate alloying before and details can be found in Ref. 29. After characterizing the pure metal/graphene interface, we investigated the metal/graphene/oxide sandwich structure by reactive vapor deposition of Al or Y metal in a 10−7 Torr O2 atmosphere in UHV. TiO2 was grown by pulsed laser deposition in 10−6 Torr oxygen atmosphere. The PLD chamber is connected by an in situ vacuum transfer system to the XPS chamber. The XPS data were acquired with a 5-channel hemispherical analyzer. A non-monochromatized dual anode x-ray source was used. The C-1s shifts reported here are relative to the C-1s position of a HOPG reference sample. First, let us demonstrate the use of C-1s spectra for determining the Fermi-level position. For example, Figure 2 in Ref. 30 shows a systematic study of high resolution C-1s XPS spectra (measured with soft x-rays at a synchrotron radiation source) for graphene grown in ultra-high vacuum on various metal substrates. The C-1s binding energy is shifted for the different investigated metals (Pt, Ir, Rh, and Ru) relative to that of HOPG. Here, we argue that the peak positions can be explained by simply accounting for the Fermi-level shift. For the weakly interacting metals Pt and Ir, i.e., metals that form negligible chemical interaction with graphene, a single peak is observed at 0.26 eV and 0.07 eV lower binding energy compared to HOPG, respectively. Note that this shift in the core level is very close to the values reported for shifts of the Fermi-level relative to the Dirac point in ARPES studies . 19,20 For the strongly interacting metals, Rh and Ru one would not necessarily expect a relationship between the core level position, i.e. Fermi-level, and the metal work function. However, due to lattice mismatch between graphene and metals, graphene forms moiré superstructures on metal substrates. In this moiré structure regions in which carbon atoms are in the “right” position for forming covalent bonds to the metal substrates and regions where the carbon atoms cannot form chemical bonds to the substrate exist. Consequently, the C-1s spectra exhibit two components, one component where the C-1s peak position is dominated by chemical shifts due to chemical bond formation and a second C-1s component for regions where graphene does not make chemical bonds with the substrate. Somewhat surprisingly, even for these strongly interacting metals, this second component exhibits binding energies that can be explained by a Fermi-level shift due to the work function difference between the metal and graphene. For Ru and Rh, a shift of the second C-1s component of 0.29 eV and 0.18 eV to higher binding energy compared to HOPG is observed, respectively. In addition to these literature data XPS-data for graphene on Cu, Pt, and Al/Ni(111) are shown in Fig. 2(a). For the clean graphene/metal samples, we measure a C-1s peak shift for Al, Cu, Ir, Pt and of +0.39, +0.32, −0.2, −0.27 eV, respectively. The Pt peak shift corresponds well to the previously reported data, shown in Fig. 2. The Ir peak is in less good agreement, most likely because of an overlap of the C-1s peak with the Ir-4d5/2 peak and related challenges in de-convoluting these peaks with the poorer resolution of our spectrometer. The C-1s peak for Cu and Al was not reported in the above-cited publication because of the more difficult/non-UHV sample preparation procedures. The increased C-1s binding energy for these metals indicates an n-type doping as is expected for low work function metals. The C-1s peak shifts are in good agreement with the reported Fermi-level shifts measured by ARPES thus suggesting a rigid bandshift as indicated in Fig. 1. In Fig. 2(b), we plot our data together with previously reported peak shifts relative to HOPG versus literature values of the metal work function. In this plot, the peak shift varies monotonically with the metal work function. Furthermore, we compare the core-level shifts with calculated Fermi-level shifts 14 using the computed work functions for the different metals. The agreement between the core level shifts and the anticipated Fermi-level shift is good. However, a small general shift of the charge doping to lower metal work function is observed for the experiments compared to the computed values. In particular, the metal work function at which no charge doping of graphene occurs is extrapolated from the measurements to 5.1 ± 0.1 eV. Taking the commonly cited neutral work function of graphene as 4.6 eV, an interface dipole between metals and graphene of 0.5 ± 0.1 eV is obtained, i.e., a little smaller than the 0.9 eV derived in the DFT simulations. To investigate the role of a dielectric substrate in the charge doping of graphene, we choose Y2O3, Al2O3, and TiO2 as dielectric materials. These materials were chosen because they span a wide range of different work functions. Furthermore, the chosen oxides also have technological relevance. Al2O3 has been widely discussed as a dielectric material for graphene, titania is sometimes used as a seed layer to improve the wetting of graphene, and finally yttria exhibits excellent wetting behavior on graphene. The measurement of the C-1s peak position after growth of ∼1 nm of these materials shows significant shifts compared to the clean metal/graphene interface as is illustrated in Figs. 3(a) and 3(b) for Cu and Pt substrates, respectively. This indicates that the charge doping of graphene may be strongly influenced by the wide bandgap material. The strongest change has been observed for graphene/Pt where the Fermi-level shifts from ∼0.3 eV below the Dirac point (p-type doped) to ∼0.3 eV above the Dirac point (n-type doped) after growth of yttria. Smaller, but still significant, variation of the doping level is observed for alumina and titania layers on graphene/Pt. We also performed measurements for yttria, alumina, and titantia on graphene/Cu, as well as for yttria on graphene/Ir. The measured graphene C-1s core levels are summarized in Fig. 3(c) and in Table I. Table I also lists literature values for the work functions of the materials. How can the change in the Fermi-level for a metal/graphene/dielectric sandwich be explained? Generally, aligning the vacuum level at an insulator (semiconductor)/metal contact is described by a Schottky contact model. This simple model neglects chemical bonding and interface states, which may be fulfilled in the case of an (inert) graphene interface layer that separates the oxide from the metal. In a Schottky contact, a space charge region in the bandgap material is formed whose charges are counterbalanced by charges in the metal. These charges are located as close as possible to the interface to minimize electrostatic energy. Because of the high density of states in metals no measurable change of the Fermi-energy in the metal is usually observed. However, in the interfaces studied here the metal is replaced by a graphene/metal heterostructure and thus charges in the Schottky contact will be located on the graphene. This charge accumulation on graphene causes a shift of the Fermi-level and consequently the C-1s core level. In order to estimate the Fermi-level shift as a function of work function difference between the metal and the oxide we model the interface as a plate capacitor. In this model the contact potential is equal to the potential on a capacitor: ΔV = Φmetal – Φoxide = α N d, where N are the charges per graphene unit cell, d is the separation between graphene and the oxide (we set d = 3.3 Å as the equilibrium separation between graphene and weakly interacting surfaces), and α = e2/ɛ0A = 34.93 eV/Å (with A = 5.18 Å2 the graphene unit cell area). In order to estimate the Fermi-level shift we relate N to the density of states for graphene. For electron energies close to the Dirac point the density of states is linear and can be expressed as D(E) = D0 E, where D0 = 0.09 e (eV2 per unit cell). Thus integration of the density of states, with limits equal to the shift of the Fermi-level, yields the charge per graphene unit cell of N = D0ΔEF2/2. From this analysis we predict a Fermi level shift of ΔEF = 0.44 √ΔV. Fig. 3(d) compares this predication with our measurements. The total shift of the Fermi-level ΔEF, i.e., the position on the metal minus the position after oxide deposition, is plotted versus the square root of the absolute value of the work function difference between metal and oxide. A reasonably linear function can be fitted with a slope of 0.38 ± 0.11, which compares favorably to the slope of 0.44 expected from the simple capacitor model. However, there is a fairly large scatter of the data points, which is likely the consequence of the uncertainty in the values for the oxide work functions. It should be mentioned that in the plot in Fig. 3(d), the contact potential has been determined using the actual metal work function and not the effective work function of the graphene modified metal. The latter is reduced by ∼0.5 eV according to our estimate, due to charge redistribution induced interface dipole. Using this reduced work function results in a worse fit. This suggests that the metal/graphene interface dipole is (partially) compensated for by a similar dipole at the graphene/oxide interface. The existence of a dipole at the graphene/oxide interface is substantiated by our studies on graphene/SrTiO3, which exhibits a dipole of 0.45 eV. In conclusion, the Fermi-level position in graphene underneath of metal contacts may be very different for metals on free-standing graphene compared to supported graphene. On supported graphene, it is the work function difference between the metal and the support material that determines the charge transfer to graphene. The effects of the substrate may not just be important for metal contacts but also if graphene is to be purposely doped by charge transfer.