Biodiesel emulsions are considered as the propitious alternative fuels for diesel engines. The need of biodiesel emulsion fuels for the diesel engines is to curtail the dependency on the fossil fuels in context to the world energy oil crisis. Henceforth, the present study provides a tangible pathway to prepare and to ameliorate the biodiesel emulsion fuel on incorporating potential alumina nanoparticles. The biodiesel emulsion fuel is prepared by emulsification technique comprising of 83% of jatropha biodiesel, 15% of water, and 2% of surfactants (Span80 and Tween80) with the aid of a mechanical agitator. The prepared biodiesel emulsion fuel is mixed with the alumina nanoparticles in the mass fractions of say 25, 50, and 100 ppm with the help of an ultrasonicator. The whole investigation is carried out in a constant speed diesel engine in three phases using jatropha biodiesel, jatropha biodiesel emulsion fuel, and alumina nanoparticle blended jatropha biodiesel emulsion fuels. The experimental results revealed a substantial enhancement in the performance and a reduction in harmful emissions for the biodiesel emulsion fuels compared to those of neat biodiesel. In addition, the incorporation of nanoparticles in the biodiesel emulsion fuel has also revealed an incremental better performance and reduced emissions than that of biodiesel emulsion fuel and biodiesel. Furthermore, the significance of shorten ignition delay effect associated with the nanoparticle blended biodiesel emulsion fuels has been investigated and asserted upon conducting a hot-plate evaporation study.
Enhanced global concern due to air pollution caused by the diesel engine has shown much interest in the ecological friendly fuels. These forecasts have triggered various research works for the search of alternative sources to replace the fossil fuels in diesel engines. In this context, the nonedible vegetable oils (such as jatropha, mahua, neem, and pongamia) and their methyl esters (biodiesel) are considered as alternative fuels. However, the direct utilization of vegetable oil in a diesel engine is often bounded due to several problems, such as high viscosity, poor atomization, and incomplete combustion. On the other hand, the methyl esters (biodiesel) derived from the vegetable oils possess high oxygen content in their molecular structure, which, in turn, leads to the formation of NOx (nitrogen oxides) under high temperature. Furthermore, the emissions of NOx are causative for global degradation, such as precursors of ozone and acid rain. In order to reduce NOx and particulate matter emissions from diesel engines, emulsification techniques are adopted. In this technique, water droplets are suspended in the oil layer by a suitable surfactant and undergo a rapid evaporation of water, which, in turn, avoids the corrosion effect on the engine cylinder surface. Another benefit of the emulsification technique is the occurrence of microexplosion phenomena, where the large fuel droplets break into smaller one and, in turn, results in vigorous vaporization in the engine cylinder. Crookes et al.3 carried out an experiment in a diesel engine using soya oil and rapeseed oil blended with 10% of water content and observed a significant enhancement in thermal efficiency and a reduction in NOx and smoke emissions. The same team 4 have reported an inferior performance for the biofuel emulsion fuels on the account of ignition difficulty and longer ignition delay at the lower loads. Yoshimoto et al.5 conducted an experimental investigation using vegetable frying oil emulsion fuel (with 30% of water content by volume) in a diesel engine and observed an appreciable reduction in NOx, smoke, and a prolonged ignition delay. On the other hand, the problem of prolonged ignition delay associated with the emulsion fuel leads to the enhancement in premixed combustion phase, high heat release rate, high cylinder peak pressure, and rough engine operation. To sort out the problem of prolonged ignition delay, some recent works on the fuel modification have been reported on adding potential nanoparticles. Tyagi et al.8 carried out a hot-plate ignition probability test and observed that adding aluminum/alumina nanoparticles to the diesel fuel will lead to a significant enhancement in the ignition temperature and shorter ignition delay. Kao et al.9 examined an experiment in a diesel engine using aluminum nanoadditive blended diesel fuel with 3%–6% of water content and found a significant improvement in the brake specific fuel consumption and reduced harmful pollutants. Selvan Arul Mozhi et al.10 conducted an experiment in a diesel engine using ceria blended with biodiesel-ethanol fuel and observed an improvement in the brake thermal efficiency and significant decrement in the ignition delay and hazardous emissions. Recently, Sajith et al.11 utilized ceria nanoadditive with the jatropha biodiesel in a single cylinder diesel engine and observed a significant reduction of NOx and HC, and an improvement in the brake thermal efficiency, owing to the catalytic action of nanoparticles. Sadhik Basha and Anand 12 critically reviewed the published literature related to the applications of nanoparticle/nanofluid in the diesel engines and concluded that adding nanoparticles/carbon nanotubes to conventional fuels will reduce the evaporation time and favors shorten ignition delay. Based on the review report on the applications of nanoadditives, the same team 13 have studied the effects of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) blended with diesel in a single cylinder diesel engine and observed an appreciable enhancement in the brake thermal efficiency and reduced harmful pollutants compared to that of neat diesel operation. Taking an initiative, the same team 14 have extended their investigation by using CNT blended water-diesel emulsion fuel (5% of water by volume) in a diesel engine and observed a substantial improvement in the brake thermal efficiency and a drastic reduction of NOx and smoke emissions. The same team 15,16 have continued their investigation on incorporating the alumina nanoadditive with the water-diesel emulsion fuel (5% and 15% of water by volume) and observed a considerable improvement in the brake thermal efficiency and reduced harmful pollutants. Furthermore, they found a significant reduction in the cylinder peak pressure, heat release rate, and ignition delay at all loads. The same team 17 have utilized alumina nanoadditive (25 and 50 ppm) blended with the biodiesel emulsion fuel (5% of water content by volume) in a single cylinder diesel engine and observed a significant improvement in the performance and reduced harmful emissions, such as NOx and smoke. In addition, they observed a significant increment in the evaporation rate for the nanoparticle blended emulsion fuels than those of neat biodiesel emulsion fuel upon conducting a hot-plate evaporation study. However, the effect of alumina nanoadditives (with the higher concentration of water) biodiesel emulsion fuels is to be investigated on the performance and emission characteristics of a diesel engine. Henceforth, the current investigation is focused to provide a feasible pathway to incorporate the alumina nanoparticles with the jatropha biodiesel emulsion fuel (15% of water content) on the performance, emission, and combustion attributes of a direct injection single cylinder compression ignition engine.
The present study is carried out in a constant speed direct injection diesel engine utilized by Sadhik and Anand ,15 as shown in Fig. 1, and the engine details are shown in Table I. The instrumentation system of the experimental setup consists of an AVL 444 Di-Gas analyzer, an AVL 437 smoke opacity meter, and a data-acquisition system. The data-acquisition system consists of a Kistler piezoelectric pressure transducer (model: 6613C), a charge amplifier, a computer, a printer, and a crank angle encoder. The AVL 444 Di-Gas analyzer and AVL 437 smoke opacity are positioned in the exhaust manifold to measure the exhaust emissions, such as NOx, CO, and unburnt hydrocarbons and the smoke opacity. A calibrated k-type chrome-alumel thermocouple is installed in the immediate exhaust of the diesel engine to measure the exhaust gas temperature. The combustion attributes of the diesel engine are obtained by means of the pressure transducer which is flush mounted on the cylinder head, and the crank angle encoder is fixed on the output shaft of the engine. The piezoelectric pressure transducer is utilized to collect the cylinder pressure data of more than 50 successive cycles using computer software for the determination of the combustion attributes, such as heat release rate, ignition delay, and maximum pressure rise rate. The heat release rate is calculated bydQtdθ=γγ−1PdVdθ+1γ−1VdPdθ+dQhtdθ,where γ=Cp/Cv, dQht/dθ is the heat release rate/crank angle (J/°C A), P is the instantaneous cylinder pressure (N/m2), and V is the instantaneous cylinder volume (m3). P, V, γ, and θ denote the cylinder gas pressure, cylinder volume, ratio of specific heats, and crank angle, respectively. The experiments are carried out by varying the loads at a constant speed of 1500 rpm at constant injection timing of 26° bTDC using jatropha biodiesel, jatropha biodiesel emulsion fuel, and alumina nanoparticle blended biodiesel emulsion fuels. The estimated uncertainties in the measured and calculated quantities are listed in Table II.
Preparation of jatropha biodiesel emulsion
 The biodiesel fuel is prepared from the nonedible jatropha oil by the standard transesterification process in the laboratory, and their properties are listed in Table III. A mechanical agitator is utilized to prepare the jatropha biodiesel emulsion fuel by mixing the jatropha biodiesel, distilled water, and surfactants broadly in two steps. The surfactant mixture of Span80 (sorbitane monooleate) and Tween 80 (polyxyethylene sorbitane monooleate) are used, as it provided a better emulsification results with a intermediate hydrophilic-lipophilic balance (HLB). In the first step, a mechanical agitator is utilized to prepare the surfactant mixture by mixing (Span80 and Tween80) with 2% by volume. The combined HLB values for the surfactants mixture are calculated by17,19HLBAB=(HA×WA)+(HB×WB)/(WA+WB)…,where HA (HLB=4.3), HB (HLB=15), WA, and WB are the HLB values and weights of the surfactants Span80 and Tween80. The HLB value of 10 ascertained a stable biodiesel emulsion fuel based on the observations. In the second step, the jatropha biodiesel (83% by volume), the surfactant mixture (with an HLB=10), and the distilled water (15% by volume) are agitated by a mechanical agitator at various test speeds say 1500, 2000, 2500, and 3000 rpm for 30 min at a room temperature of 30 °C. The prepared samples of biodiesel emulsion fuels (JBDS15W) at various test speeds have a creamy yellow color and were kept in the graduated glass test tubes. Subsequently, the biodiesel samples are subjected for the stability characteristic investigations (in accordance with a similar study carried out by Ghannam and Selim 20,21). The percentage of separated water layer (by volume) with respect to the elapsed time is measured for each sample. The percentage of separated water layer is calculated bySeparated water layer (%)=[(H2O)initial–(H2O)final]×100/(H2O)initial…,where (H2O)initial stands for the initial water content and (H2O)final stands for the final water content. It is observed from Fig. 2 that the biodiesel emulsion fuel produced at a test speed of 3000 rpm (other than 1500, 2000, and 2500 rpm) was more stable for more than 4 days (96 h). Furthermore, an electron microscope is utilized to capture the image of mean water droplet of the JBDS15W fuel at a magnification of 100, as shown in Fig. 3.
Preparation of nanoparticle blended jatropha biodiesel emulsion
 The alumina nanoparticles with an average size of 51 nm are supplied by the manufacturer, M/s. Alfa Aesar, USA, and their detailed specifications are listed in Table IV. The morphology of the alumina nanoparticles is determined by TEM (model: JEM 3010, Japan), as shown in Fig. 4. The nanoparticle blended jatropha biodiesel emulsion fuels are prepared in three steps with the aid of a mechanical agitator and an ultrasonicator (model: Lark SB5200, 120 W, 40 kHz). The ultrasonication technique is widely adopted to disperse the nanoparticles in a base fluid, to facilitate the possible agglomerate particles back to nanometer size. In the first step, the ultrasonicator is used to disperse the alumina nanoparticles with a delimitate mass fraction of 25 ppm in the distilled water (15% by volume) for 30 min. The photographic and microscopic images (10×) of alumina nanoparticles dispersed in the distilled water are shown in Fig. 5. It is observed that upon adding the alumina nanoparticles to the distilled water, there is a significant change in color. In the second step, the surfactant mixture (Span80 and Tween80) is prepared in a similar fashion as adopted for JBDS15W fuel. In the third step, the jatropha biodiesel (83% by volume), the surfactant mixture (Span80 and Tween80), and the distilled water containing alumina nanoparticles are mixed with the aid of a mechanical agitator at various test speeds (say 1500, 2000, 2500, and 3000 rpm) for 30 min. The prepared nanoparticles biodiesel emulsion fuel (JBDS15W25A) are kept in the graduated glass test tubes and subsequently subjected for the stability characteristic studies. The same procedure is carried out for the other mass fractions (50 and 100 ppm) to prepare the JBDS15W50A and JBDS15100A fuels. The percentage of separated water layer (by volume) with respect to the elapsed time is measured for each sample using Eq. (2). It is observed from Fig. 6 that the nanoparticle blended biodiesel emulsion fuels produced at a test speed of 3000 rpm were stable for more than 5 days (120 h) compared to other test speeds of 1500, 2000, and 2500 rpm. Moreover, it was observed that after ultrasonication, the alumina nanoparticles are completely dispersed in the distilled water. Henceforth, this may possibly lead to nanoparticles encased water droplet in the continuous phase of jatropha biodiesel during the emulsification process. Under these circumstances, the nanoparticles encapsulated water droplet in the biodiesel emulsion fuel will not have a tendency to undergo wear in the engine fuel system nor in the injection systems.15
The following section illustrates the results obtained from the combustion, performance, and the emission characteristics of the diesel engine using the tested fuels. The variation of cylinder pressure and the heat release rate are plotted against crank angle, whereas the ignition delay and maximum pressure rise rate are plotted against the brake mean effective pressure (bmep). The variation of the brake thermal efficiency and brake specific fuel consumption and the emission characteristics are plotted against bmep.

 Figure 7 illustrates the variation of cylinder pressure and the heat release rate at the full load with respect to crank angle for the tested fuels. It is examined from the figure that the magnitude of the peak pressure and heat release rate is high for the jatropha biodiesel emulsion fuel due to the enhancement of premixed combustion and prolonged ignition delay compared to other tested fuels. Sachuthananthan and Jeyachandran 23 also observed the similar trend of enhanced heat release rate for their biodiesel emulsion fuel. On the other hand, the magnitude of combustion parameters, such as heat release rate, peak pressure, and pressure rise rate (refer to Fig. 8), is reduced for the nanoparticle blended jatropha biodiesel emulsion fuels than biodiesel emulsion fuel. This could be due to the presence of potential nanoparticles in the biodiesel emulsion fuel which has lead to early combustion, owing to their shortened ignition delay, enhanced surface area/volume ratio, and improved ignition characteristics . 15 The cylinder peak pressure for the JBDS15W at the full load observed is 83.7 bars compared to 72.3, 81.1, 79.5 and 77.5 bars for JBD, JBDS15W25A, JBDS15W50A, and JBDS15W100A, respectively.

 Figure 8 depicts the variation of ignition delay with respect to bmep for the tested fuels. It is observed that there is a problem of prolong ignition delay associated with the biodiesel emulsion fuel due to the enhancement of premixed combustion and significant heat absorption by water vaporization in the fuel jet. While in the case of nanoparticle blended biodiesel emulsion fuels, the magnitude of ignition delay is reduced considerably, owing to the quick evaporation rate, improved ignition properties, and enhanced surface area/volume ratio characteristics . 8 Furthermore, during the ignition delay period, the presence of potential nanoparticles in the fuel-air mixture could have improved (as a result of enhanced surface area/volume ratio) due to early combustion. In addition, it is experimentally proved that the rate of evaporation for the nanoparticle blended biodiesel emulsion fuels is quicker than that of biodiesel emulsion fuel and neat biodiesel with the aid of a hot-plate evaporation setup. In general, the hot-plate evaporation characteristic is adopted to predict the performance of the combustion process of the emulsion fuels . 25,26 The hot-plate evaporation characteristic for the tested fuels is carried out from the setup utilized by Sadhik and Anand ,16 as shown in Fig. 9. The hot-plate setup majorly consists of stainless steel plate, electrical heater, thermocouples, and variac. The hot plate has a mirror finished concave cavity at the top surface to accommodate a specified mass of the fuel droplet and was kept directly on top of an electrical heater. A height of 20 mm is chosen to drop the fuel droplets on the concave cavity by means of a glass burette. The k-type thermocouples are installed near the concave cavity to record the temperature of the hot plate, and the variac is used to maintain the surface temperature of the hot plate. When the electrical heater is switched on, the hot-plate temperature rises. As a consequence, when the hot-plate temperature reaches a steady state condition, the fuel droplets are made to fall on the concave cavity. Simultaneously, the time duration is noted using a digital timer until the fuel droplet disappears on the hot surface. A series of three trials is performed under identical conditions to check for the repeatability of the results, and each recorded time is the average of three values. The variations of evaporation rate with respect to hot-plate surface temperature for the tested fuels are shown in Fig. 10. It is noted that the evaporation rate is considerably reduced for the nanoparticle blended emulsion fuels than that of JBDS15W fuel at all hot-plate surface temperatures. This could be attributed to nanoparticles encased water droplet present in biodiesel emulsion fuel, which has enhanced the heat transfer rate during the evaporation. In general, the addition of nanoparticles to any base fluid (such as water) enhances the heat transfer rate, owing to their high surface area/volume ratio and heat conduction properties . 27 Moreover, as the nanoparticles are enveloped in the water droplet, the conduction heat transfer is dominant, and hence the rate of evaporation rate is accelerated than that of JBDS15W. Furthermore, the critical surface temperatures (the temperature corresponding to maximum heat transfer rate, i.e., minimum evaporation time) for JBDS15W100A, JBDS15W50A, JBDS15W25A, JBDS15W, and JBD observed are 302, 311, 322, 331, and 340 °C, respectively, and are shown in the figure. It is also noted that the critical surface temperature of the JBDS15W100A fuel is lower due to the high dosage of alumina nanoparticles, which have lead to high heat transfer rate resulting in minimum evaporation time. Hence, this study ensures that the magnitude of the ignition delay could be shortened due to the addition of nanoparticles to the biodiesel emulsion fuel. As a consequence, if the hot-plate temperature is further enhanced, the fuel droplet lifetime dramatically increases due to the development of insulating vapor layer between the droplet and the hot plate as an effect of the Leidenfrost phenomena . 28,29

 Figure 11 illustrates the variation of brake thermal efficiency for the tested fuels with respect to bmep. It is observed that at all loads the brake thermal efficiency of the nanoparticle blended emulsion fuels is high compared to that of JBDS15W and JBD fuels. This could be probably due to the combined effect of microexplosion and secondary atomization along with the presence of potential nanoparticles, as shown in Fig. 12. The microexplosion phenomenon in the water-biodiesel emulsion fuel is a result of the volatility difference between water and biodiesel. Once the alumina nanoparticles encased water droplet biodiesel emulsion fuel subjected to high pressure and high temperature environment in the engine cylinder, the water droplets will absorb the heat quickly (due to the low boiling point water as compared to that of biodiesel). This effect leads to the explosion of water droplets through the surrounding oil layers called microexplosion. Subsequently, a number of secondary fuel droplets of very fine size are produced, which, in turn, evaporates quickly. Thus, the formation of secondary droplets in the combustion chamber enhances the fuel-air mixing in the presence of potential nanoparticles. Furthermore, the nanoparticles, in general, possess enhanced surface area/volume ratio and reactive surfaces which leads to higher chemical reactivity to act as a catalyst. Under these circumstances, the brake thermal efficiency of nanoparticle blended biodiesel emulsion fuels is improved, owing to the catalytic activity of alumina nanoparticles. On the other hand, the brake thermal efficiency of JBDS15W fuel is low due to the effect of water addition, longer ignition delay, and reduced engine temperature. The maximum brake thermal efficiency at the full load is 29.4% for JBDS15W100A, whereas it is 28.2%, 27.1%, 25.5%, and 24.9% for JBDS15W50A, JBDS15W25A, JBDS15W, and JBD, respectively. The variation of brake specific fuel consumption for the tested fuels with respect to bmep is shown in Fig. 11. It is observed that the brake specific fuel consumption is improved for the nanoparticle blended biodiesel emulsion fuels compared to that of JBDS15W and JBD. This could be due to the existence of alumina nanoparticles in the encapsulated water droplets present in the biodiesel emulsion fuel. Owing to the enhanced surface area/volume ratio and shorten ignition delay characteristics of nanoparticles, sufficient fuel could have accrued in the combustion chamber to undergo a possible catalytic effect in the unit volume of the fuel during the combustion. This effect could have lead to improvement in the specific fuel consumption for the nanoparticle blended biodiesel emulsion fuels compared to that of biodiesel emulsion fuel. In the case of JBDS15W fuel, the water droplets in the biodiesel oil layer undergo rapid evaporation delaying autoignition due to prolonged ignition delay. This leads to excess fuel burning in premixed combustion, which results in higher brake specific fuel consumption compared to that of nanoparticle blended biodiesel emulsion fuels. The lower brake specific fuel consumption observed is 0.31 kg/kW h for JBDS15W100A, whereas it is 0.32, 0.33, 0.36, and 0.37 kg/kW h for JBDS15W50A, JBDS15W25A, JBDS15W, and JBD at the full load, respectively.
Variation of nitrogen oxide (NOx)
 The formation of NOx emission in diesel engines is due to the high temperature environment and oxygen availability during the combustion. It is observed from Fig. 13 that the magnitude of NOx emissions is high for JBD compared to that of other tested fuels, owing to their high oxygen content and exorbitant gas temperature. In the case of JBDS15W fuel, the magnitude of NOx emission is drastically reduced than that of the JBD fuel due to the microexplosion and heat sink effects caused by the finely dispersed water droplets present in the emulsion fuel 3,32,33 and high latent heat of vaporization (2257 kJ/kg) of water. On the other hand, there is a further reduction of NOx emissions for the nanoparticle blended biodiesel emulsion fuels compared to that of the JBDS15W fuel due to reduced ignition delay, early combustion, and ample fuel accumulation in the engine cylinder. On the account of the shorten ignition delay effect associated with the nanoparticle blended biodiesel emulsion fuels, a sufficient fuel could have accumulated in the engine cylinder, enhancing better fuel-air mixing to cause reduced NOx emissions . 17,34 Furthermore, there is also a considerable reduction in the exhaust gas temperature for the biodiesel emulsion fuels compared to that of JBD as an effect of microexplosion, as shown in Fig. 13. Owing to this effect, the water droplet in the combustion chamber lowers the charge temperature in the engine cylinder, inducing a reduced exhaust gas temperature 35 compared to that of JBD fuel. The magnitude of NOx emission observed is 870 ppm for JBDS15W100A, whereas it is 918, 949, 989, and 1282 ppm for JBDS15W50A, JBDS15W25A, JBD15W, and JBD at the full load, respectively.

 Figure 14 illustrates the variation of CO and unburnt HC emissions for the tested fuels. It is observed from the figure that there is an enhancement in CO emissions for the biodiesel emulsion fuel. This could be probably due to the adverse effect of water addition, which has lead to accumulation of more fuel on the account of prolonged ignition delay. On the other hand, there is a marginal decrement in CO emissions for the nanoparticle biodiesel emulsion fuels compared to that of JBDS15W. This could be attributed to the enhanced surface area/volume ratio and high catalytic activity of alumina nanoparticles present in the biodiesel emulsion fuel, which has lead to shortened ignition delay. Due to this effect, there is an enhancement in the fuel-air mixing in the combustion chamber ,11 leading to complete combustion. The variation of unburnt hydrocarbon emissions for the tested fuels is depicted in Fig. 14. In general, the magnitude of unburnt HC emissions for the emulsion fuels is enhanced, owing to the higher accumulation of fuel in the premixed combustion phase (as a result of prolonged ignition delay). This effect could have lead to increased unburnt HC emissions for the biodiesel emulsion fuel compared to that of nanoparticle blended biodiesel emulsion fuels. In the case of nanoparticle blended biodiesel emulsion fuels, the magnitude of unburnt HC emissions is reduced due to hydrocarbon oxidation 11 and secondary atomization effects. Furthermore, the degree of fuel-air mixing in the presence of nanoparticles could have improved, on the account of secondary atomization and improved catalytic effect associated with the nanoparticle blended biodiesel emulsion fuels. The magnitude of unburnt HC emission observed is 70 ppm for JBDS15W100A, whereas it is 75, 82, 86, and 59 ppm for JBDS15W50A, JBDS15W25A, JBD15W, and JBD at the full load, respectively.
Variation of smoke 
 Figure 15 shows the variations of smoke opacity for the tested fuels at the loads. It is observed from the figure that there is a significant reduction of smoke emissions for the biodiesel emulsion fuels as compared to that of neat biodiesel. The reduced smoke emissions for the biodiesel emulsion fuel could be due to the presence of water vapor in the combustion chamber (as a result of microexplosion effect), which have lead to dilution in the concentration of black smoke. In addition, on the account of the water content in the biodiesel emulsion fuel, there could be an appreciable amount of air entrainment in the emulsion spray and enhanced OH (hydroxyl) radicals during the combustion in the engine cylinder ,6,15,17,36 which have collectively lead to substantial reduction of smoke emissions. The alumina nanoparticle blended biodiesel emulsion fuels also shown similar characteristic trend as that of biodiesel emulsion fuel, with a further reduction of smoke emissions. The addition of nanoparticles to the biodiesel emulsion fuel has imparted shorter ignition delay, enhanced evaporation, and improved ignition characteristics. Due to the above effects associated with the nanoparticle blended biodiesel emulsion fuels, an ample fuel could have been induced in the combustion chamber prior to the ignition, leading to better combustion, air-fuel mixing, and, in turn, resulting in reduced smoke emissions. Furthermore, the possible particulates/nanoparticles from diesel exhaust can be trapped at the exhaust manifold by employing electrostatic precipitator. The magnitude of the smoke opacity at the full load is 49% for JBDS15W100A, whereas it is 52%, 55%, 57%, and 67% for JBDS15W50A, JBDS15W25A, JBDS15W, and JBD, respectively.
The following conclusions may be drawn as a result of the present investigation:
 The prepared biodiesel emulsion fuels (with/without alumina nanoparticles) were stable for more than five days under idle conditions.
 The addition of potential nanoparticles to the biodiesel emulsion fuels has imparted reduced peak pressure, heat release rate, and ignition delay compared to that of neat biodiesel emulsion fuel operation.
 The brake thermal efficiency of JBDS15W100A fuel is high compared to that of other tested fuels. At the rated load, the maximum brake thermal efficiency of JBDS15W100A fuel is 29.4%, whereas it is 24.9% for the JBD fuel.
 The NOx and smoke emissions are drastically reduced for the biodiesel emulsion fuels compared to that of jatropha biodiesel. The magnitude of NOx and smoke emission observed is 870 ppm and 49% for JBDS15W100A fuel, whereas it is 1282 ppm and 67% for JBD fuel at the full load, respectively. As a whole, the performance and the emission characteristics of the diesel engine are improved due to the incorporation of alumina nanoparticles in the biodiesel emulsion fuels, leading to reduced peak pressure and ignition delay.