Ultra-high temperature ceramics are the ideal materials for extreme conditions owing to their very high melting points and good thermo-mechanical properties at high temperatures. For these reasons, they are widely known as materials for aerospace applications. This paper presents a comparative spectral characterization of zirconium, hafnium, and tantalum carbides ultra-high temperature ceramics for concentrating solar power applications. Room-temperature reflectance spectra have been measured from the ultraviolet wavelength region to the mid-infrared band. Using these spectral properties, the ceramics were evaluated as sunlight absorbers in receivers for high-temperature thermodynamic solar plants.
Different concepts for solar receiver systems have been developed. In addition, also within a given approach, different solutions are possible. For instance, if we consider linear parabolic collectors operating at low and medium temperatures, they can convert incident solar radiation into heat in different ways. The most diffused systems use sunlight absorption by blackened or specially developed absorbing surfaces, from which heat is collected and conducted to a heat transfer fluid. Another possibility is the direct absorption of sunlight by a heat transfer fluid flowing through transparent tubes (a black liquid 1 and, more recently, a nanofluid 2,3). Different collector architectures with associated working temperature ranges require tailored systems solutions . 4 It is a general rule that the efficiency of a collector increases with the concentration factor and, using a turbine, the efficiency to produce electricity improves with the working temperature. In solar tower plants, the heliostat field concentrates the collected sunlight onto the receiver, and its high temperature capability strongly determines the system performance. Several receiver schemes and materials have been studied. They can be basically distinguished in three groups: receivers with sunlight absorption by particles suspended in a gas stream ,5 cavity receivers with absorption by a bulk material and either employing water/steam or molten salt as heat transfer fluid ,4 and volumetric receivers with absorption by a porous material and heat transfer to a gas flowing through it. Each solution has advantages and drawbacks and the best tradeoff generally depends on the specific application. Advantages of the proposed bulk absorber cavity scheme are low heat loss, easy control, high heat capacity, and the possibility to exploit mature technologies of conventional fossil fuel power plants . 7 Ultra-high temperature ceramics (UHTCs) are a family of materials including borides, carbides, and nitrides of hafnium, zirconium, and tantalum. UHTCs are characterized by some of the highest melting points of known materials: in particular, monocarbides of Ta and Hf exhibit the highest melting temperatures (>3900 °C) among every known compound. In addition, all UHTCs are very hard, have good wear resistance, mechanical strength, good chemical stability, strength at high temperatures, and high thermal conductivity. Due to these properties, UHTCs are ideal elements for thermal protection systems, especially those requiring chemical and structural stability at extremely high operating temperatures. Nowadays, UHTCs are being investigated in the aerospace industry for hypersonic vehicles, rocket motor nozzles, or atmospheric entry probes, compatible with the most extreme entry conditions. 8–11 The ultra-high melting points of UHTCs, together with the unique combination of good thermal conductivity and chemical stability, suggest consideration of these materials for application in solar furnaces . 12,13 For evaluation of the potential of UHTCs as selective sunlight absorbers in solar cavities operating at very high temperatures, it is essential to evaluate the spectral absorber properties of these materials. The ideal absorber material is spectrally selective with respect to thermal radiation: it has a low reflectance (ideally approaching zero) at solar spectrum wavelengths (λ < 3 μm) and a high reflectance (ideally approaching 100%) for longer wavelengths. The thermal emission spectrum requirements, at the transition wavelength range from low to high reflectance, change according to the plant operating temperature. Studies of spectral emissivity characteristics of either bulk 15–18 or film samples 19 of UHTCs dated back to the 1960 s and were conducted in the framework of space or military applications. Due to the intrinsic difficulty to perform high-temperature emissivity measurements and to the fact that emissivity strongly depends on the peculiar material composition, fabrication method ,18 and surface finishing, 15–17 available literature data are difficult to interpret and to compare. For example, they show different emissivity values for materials produced by different suppliers, while they do not give information about several important parameters, such as actual material composition, densification level, surface finishing, and porosity. In addition, available data often refer to different physical quantities (total hemispherical, total normal, or spectral normal emissivities) or may show significant disagreement. Moreover, many of the UHTCs are significantly non-stoichiometric 20 and the precise compositions and phases are often unclear from the literature. While optical properties of films and coatings of some transition metal carbides and nitrides were investigated, 21–25 to the best of the author’s knowledge, reports on optical properties of UHTC carbides are available in the literature only for single-crystalline samples of tantalum carbide 26 and zirconium carbide. However, polycrystalline UHTC carbides are easier to produce than single crystals for solar absorber applications. Compared to single crystals, polycrystalline ceramics are expected to exhibit different optical properties due to light scattering effects from ground boundaries and pores . 29 The present paper provides a preliminary comparative analysis of several ceramic ultra-high temperature carbide materials aimed to identify the most promising for concentrating solar power (CSP) applications. We describe the optical characterization of various zirconium, hafnium, and tantalum carbide-based compositions. Their optical properties are compared to those of more conventional ceramic materials such as SiC-based ceramics, which were used in volumetric solar absorbers . 30 Room-temperature reflectance optical spectra have been measured from ultraviolet (UV) to mid-infrared (MIR) wavelength regions. In particular, UV to near infrared (NIR) spectra have enabled determination of the sunlight absorbing properties of samples, whereas investigations in the MIR region have permitted a preliminary evaluation of the materials properties as high-temperature thermal emitters. It should be pointed out that the absorber emissivity properties in the medium infrared band are related to the MIR reflectivities. These properties are required to evaluate new approaches to increase the operating temperature of thermal solar plants.
Materials
 Commercial powders were used to prepare the ceramic materials: ZrC Grade B (H.C. Starck, Germany), mean particle size 3.8 µm; HfC (Cerac, Inc. Milwaukee, WI), particle size range 0. 2–1.5 µm; TaC (Cerac Inc, Milwaukee, WI), particle size range 0. 2–1.5 µm; TaSi2 (ABCR, GmbH & Co, Karlsruhe, Germany), −45 µm; MoSi2 (<2 µm, Aldrich, Steinbeim, Germany). Compositional details are reported in Table I. Some samples were prepared by sintering the as-received powders at temperatures lower than 2000 °C, in order to produce porous materials. Other materials were prepared mixing the carbide powder with sintering aids such as MoSi2 or TaSi2 in amounts between 5 and 20% vol. in order to get fully dense pellets. In the latter case, the powder mixtures were milled in absolute ethanol using ceramic milling media, subsequently dried in a rotary evaporator, and sieved through a 250 µm screen. The pellets were sintered at temperatures around 1900 °C. Further details on materials’ preparation are available in Refs. 31–35. After sintering, the bulk densities were measured by the Archimedes method. Crystalline phases were identified by x-ray diffraction (XRD, Siemens D500, Karlsruhe, Germany). Bulk compositions and surface morphology were analysed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Cambridge S360, Cambridge, UK) and energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS, INCA Energy 300, Oxford Instruments, High Wycombe, UK). Image analysis (IMAGE Pro-Plus 7.0, Media Cybernetics, Silver Spring, MD) was also performed on SEM micrographs to quantify the amount of secondary phases. Flat surfaces were prepared by grinding and polishing the sintered materials with diamond pastes with particle size down to 1 µm. The mean surface roughness (Ra) and the distance (Rt) between the highest asperity, peak or summit, and the lowest valley were measured according to the European standard CEN 624-4 using a commercial contact stylus instrument (Taylor Hobson mod. Talysurf Plus) fitted with a 2 µm-radius conical diamond tip over a track length of 8 mm and with a cut-off length of 0.8 mm. Surface roughness values are reported in Table I.

 Optical reflectance spectra in the 0. 25–2.5 µm wavelength region were acquired using a double-beam spectrophotometer (Lambda 900 by Perkin Elmer) equipped with a 150-mm diameter integration sphere for the measurement of both the total and purely diffuse reflectance. Specular reflectance spectra in the 1. 5–25 μm wavelength region were acquired using a Fourier Transform FT-IR "Excalibur" Bio-Rad spectrophotometer. As for the evaluation of relative weight of diffuse versus specular reflectance, at first, it should be observed that ideal perfectly polished surfaces show only specular reflection, whereas real surfaces always have a diffuse reflectance component that becomes increasingly negligible as surface roughness decreases and light wavelength increases. Since our goal was to identify the most promising UHTC families for solar thermal applications, the characterization of surface scattering was beyond the scope of the present work. For this reason, this paper mentions only some basic considerations on surface quality, just to be able to estimate the confidence level of acquired specular reflectance spectra. To do that, we followed the convention, applied in the market of optical components, that the surface is considered to be an acceptable mirror for the light wavelength λ if it has peak-to-valley features with maximum λ/4 depth. On the base of the measured roughness values, summarized in Table I, we concluded that all the carbide samples satisfy the λ/4 criterion for wavelengths longer than 0.26 µm. To assess the response of our ceramics to the sunlight spectrum, we measured both the total (hemispherical) and the purely diffuse reflectance values in the UV to NIR spectral band. On the other hand, for all samples, the MIR specular reflectance spectrum can be practically considered as total reflectance within the scope of the present analysis, due to the combined effect of surface roughness and light wavelength, as already discussed. Therefore, the MIR spectra provide useful information about the spectral curve, which allows discriminating the spectral behavior of different UHTC families. The reflectance of MoSi2 was measured considering that this intermetallic was used as additive for the densification of other ceramics.
Microstructural features of the sintered
 The UHTC carbide ZrC, HfC, and TaC are crystalline compounds of a host metal and carbon; they have an NaCl-type structure and are also referred to as interstitial carbides. These carbides have the physical properties of ceramics and the electronic properties of metals, i.e., high hardness and strength with high thermal and electrical conductivities as well as metal-like reflectivity spectra with a high expected reflectivity value in the infrared band. Furthermore, they have the highest melting points of any group of materials, combined with high thermal and chemical stability. Some basic properties are summarized in Table II (data from Ref. 37). A drawback of this class of materials is the poor resistance to oxidation. All these carbides start to readily oxidize at T > 700 °C in air, forming porous scales together with large volume expansions, cracking and detachment from the substrate. On the other hand, SiC is a hard semiconducting material and has been used in ceramics for many years as abrasive, wear resistant, oxidation resistant, and corrosion resistant parts. SiC is very refractory, tending to dissociate at temperatures above 2500 °C. For this reason, it is currently employed in high temperature structural components. In comparison with other carbides, SiC is quite difficult to densify without additives because of the covalent nature of Si-C bonding and the low self-diffusion coefficient. In contrast to the UHTC carbides, SiC has a very good oxidation resistance up to 1800 °C due to the development of a protective silica layer. The typical microstructural features of tested materials are briefly summarized in the next paragraphs. Starting compositions, final densities, compositions, and surface roughness values are reported in Table I. ZrC-based materials: Pure ZrC labelled as ZC99 was densified by hot pressing at 1930 °C and is characterized by a regular microstructure with equiaxed ZrC grains with dimensions around 10–20 µm (Fig. 1(a)). Residual porosity was 1 vol. %. Traces of graphite are visible in the microstructure and are due to C contamination in the starting powder. The sample labelled as ZCM100 is a composite initially containing 10 vol. % MoSi2 and was sintered by hot pressing at 1900 °C, reaching the full density (Fig. 1(b)). During densification complex oxidation and carburization reactions involving spurious oxide phases, MoSi2 and C27 resulted in formation of some SiC. According to x-ray diffraction and SEM-EDS analyses, black contrasting features visible in the polished microstructure were SiC particles. Their amount was estimated through image analysis to be around 5 vol. %, while residual MoSi2 was around 6–7 vol. %. The sample labelled as ZCM96 (Fig. 1(c)) is a composite initially containing 20 vol. % MoSi2. It was sintered in a conventional graphite furnace under an inert gas flux at 1950 °C without application of external pressure. The obtained sample l density was around 96%. MoSi2 amount was higher than 15 vol. %, whilst the amount of formed SiC was around 2–3 vol. %. HfC-based materials: A monolithic sample of HfC was consolidated by hot pressing at 1850 °C reaching a final density of 67%. This porous sample, labelled as HC67, contains a very fine open porosity. Rounded pores have dimensions usually lower than 1 µm (Fig. 2(a)). HCT85 is a composite material containing 5 vol. % of TaSi2 and a final porosity of about 15 vol. % (Fig. 2(b)). HCM95 and HCM100 are composite materials consolidated by hot pressing at 1900 °C, with a starting MoSi2 content of 10 and 15 vol. % and with densities of 95% and 100%, respectively (Figs. 2(c) and 2(d)). In the sintered microstructures, the MoSi2 content is very close to the initial composition, as confirmed by x-ray diffraction spectra. A low amount of SiC was also detected by EDS-analysis (1 vol. %). All the HfC-carbide samples contained 3–4 vol. % of hafnium oxide due to oxide impurities in the starting powder. TaC-based materials: Microstructural features of the TaC-based materials are shown in Figs. 3(a)–3(d). TC76 is a monolithic material consolidated by hot pressing at 1800 °C and is characterized by a fine microstructure and fine porosity and a final relative density of 76% (Fig. 3(a)). TC92 is a monolithic material consolidated at 1900 °C and reached a much higher density, around 92% (Fig. 3(b)). TaC grains with size around 10–20 µm are recognizable in the microstructure together with an amount of very fine closed porosity with pore dimensions in the range 0. 3–1 µm. TCT97 is a composite material initially containing 15 vol. % TaSi2. It was consolidated by hot pressing at 1750 °C reaching the full densification. In the matrix, TaSi2 phase is recognizable as the one with irregular features and slightly darker contrast compared to the matrix (Fig. 3(c)). According to x-ray diffraction and image analysis, the content was estimated to be close to the starting content. Black features in Fig. 3(c) are amorphous phases based on SiO2, arising from reaction of TaSi2 with oxygen species during the sintering cycle. Their amount is around 2–3 vol. %. TCM100 is a composite material initially containing 15 vol. % MoSi2. The material was consolidated by hot pressing at 1900 °C reaching the full densification. In the microstructure, beside the constituent phases, a significant fraction of amorphous silica (2%–3%) was detected 31 (Fig. 3(d)). According to x-ray diffraction and image analysis, the MoSi2 content was very close to the initial content. SiC-based materials: The SiC-based sample labelled as SC100 is a fully dense monolithic material sintered at 2150 °C with a low percentage of B4C and carbon as sintering agents. In the sintered microstructure, SiC grains (around 10 µm) are recognizable, along with a small fraction of C and B4C impurities (Fig. 4). Generally speaking, except for pure materials, ZC99, HC67, TC76, and TC92, all composites contain major amounts of secondary phases as indicated in Table I, deriving from the addition of sintering agents, MoSi2 or TaSi2. These silicides remained mostly confined as distinct grains in the carbide matrices. To a lesser degree, they reacted with oxide species or C giving rise to SiO2 or SiC species, respectively, depending on the sintering environment/conditions as previously reported. Concerning the surface preparation, it can be observed from Table I that the Ra values are very similar for most of investigated materials. Finally, only for comparative purposes, a pure MoSi2 material was also analyzed, as it is the most widely used secondary phase for the preparation of these carbides.
Optical 
 Room-temperature optical reflectance spectra of samples under investigation are shown in Figs. 5–7. The spectra of SiC and MoSi2 are also reported for comparison, as they affect the reflectivity profile in the majority of samples, as discussed below. The reference SiC-based sample is characterized by the well recognizable reststrahlen reflectance peak at around 12.4 µm (hollow square symbols in Fig. 5). On the other hand, MoSi2 has a main reflectivity minimum at around 2.7 µm and secondary minima at around 6.1, 7.3, and 10.1 µm. ZrC- based materials: As for zirconium carbides (Fig. 5), pure ZrC (ZC99) shows a step-like reflectivity curve, with two minima around 0.38 and 1.35 µm and with no other peaks or additional features in the near and medium infrared. In both the ZrC-based composites spectra (namely those of ZCM100 and ZC-M96), it is possible to identify a secondary peak at around 12.4 µm wavelength due to the presence of residual SiC in the microstructure, as it can be easily recognized by comparing their curves to the spectrum of the SiC-based material. This peak is less pronounced in ZCM96, due to the lower amount of SiC (see Table I). In this sample, the spectrum is also affected by the presence of MoSi2, as inferred from the additional minimum around 2.7 µm. HfC-based materials: Fig. 6 reports the reflectivity spectra of HfC-based materials. Pure hafnium carbide (HC67) shows two relative reflectance minima in the UV-visible region, at around 0.38 and 1. 25–1.30 µm, and a monotonic reflectivity increase towards the infrared zone, with a small feature around 8.6 µm. A similar UV-VIS spectrum is shown by the sample HC-5 T-85, produced with the TaSi2 sintering aid. As for the samples produced with the MoSi2 sintering aid, the one with the highest amount (HCM100) shows the typical MoSi2 reflectance shoulder at around 2.7 µm, thus confirming that the presence of silicide residuals, in the amount of 10 vol. % or higher, affects the optical spectrum. As for the dependence of reflectivity characteristics on porosity, Fig. 6 compares materials with similar surface finishing levels but with different densities (67%, 85%, 95%, 100%, see Table I). Besides the discussed differences in the spectral distribution due to the use of MoSi2 or TaSi2 as sintering aids, the absolute values of reflectance for all samples with densities higher than 85% appear similar, while the reflectivity of highest porosity samples is lower. This means that samples with porosities up to 15% actually behave in a similar way, if the optical reflectivity is concerned. However for larger differences in porosity, like those shown by HC67, it is reasonable to deduce a reflectivity decrease as the porosity increases (or, equivalently, as the density decreases). In fact, it seems reasonable to expect some light-trapping-like effects due to surface pores. TaC-based materials: the reflectivity curves of pure TaC (TC76 and TC92 samples in Fig. 7) show a reflectivity minimum at around 0.4 µm (which was detected for all TaC-based materials), a monotonic reflectivity increase up to 2.3 µm, then a lower slope increase up to around 8 µm, and finally a nearly constant reflectivity plateau for longer wavelengths. The different reflectivity values of TC92 and TC76 could be likely ascribed to a porosity effect (see Sec. IV). As for the doped samples, the spectrum confirms the presence of MoSi2 residuals in the TCM100 sample (the pronounced shoulder in the reflectivity curve of this sample at around 2.7 µm if compared to those of pure TaC). The TCM100 and TCT97 samples have similar density (100% and 97%, respectively). They have been produced with different sintering aids: MoSi2 for TCM100 and TaSi2 for TCT97. The spectrum of TCT97 shows a pronounced rise edge below 5 µm, with no concavity change for longer wavelengths. It can be observed that the presence of significant fractions of TaSi2 in the final sample does not seem to affect the spectral curve, which is different from that of MoSi2-containing sample. Regarding the effect on reflectance of sample porosity, the values are very similar for densities higher than 90%, while the values for lower density samples were significantly lower, as it was also found with the HfC compositions. This means that about 10% of porosity difference (i.e., for samples with 92% and 100% densities, respectively) does not significantly alter the optical reflectivity. On the other hand, the significantly higher porosity of TC76 results in a reflectivity decrease.
As general conclusions of this optical characterization, it is apparent from Figs. 5–7 that ultra-refractory carbides such as ZrC, HfC, and TaC materials behave very differently from SiC. SiC only has a well-recognizable reflectance peak at around 12 μm of wavelength, with a slight reflectivity decrease from 15 to 25 μm, in agreement with some of the samples analyzed in Ref. 18. On the contrary, all UHTCs, even with some differences among them-selves, display a step-like increase of reflectance from visible to infrared, with presence of a wavelength reflectance cutoff. The difference in the shape of reflectivity curves of UHTCs with respect to that of SiC arises from their different energy level structure. UHTCs have metal-like electronic structure that, from the point of view of optical characteristics, generates a smooth spectral reflectivity curve, which increases almost monotonically from VIS to infrared, and shows a high value of a reflectivity plateau for a wide spectral range in the infrared region. On the other hand, the semiconducting character of SiC is connected to the existence of discrete vibrational states arising in big steps in the reflectivity curve with sudden changes from very low to very high reflectivity values. For UHTCs, the wavelengths corresponding to a reflectance of 50% of the respective peak value are listed in Table III. Zirconium carbide-based samples have cutoff wavelengths roughly around 1.1 and 1.6 µm, while tantalum carbide-based materials show a cutoff in the visible range, roughly around 0.6 µm for all the investigated density levels. Hafnium-carbide based sample show a larger variability in the cutoff wavelengths, as they range from 1.08 µm for the dense HCM95 to 3.47 µm for the porous pure sample HC67. For a single sample of this series (HCM100), the measurement of the spectrum in the UV-visible range was not possible because of the very small specimen size. A good absorber for a solar furnace is a material providing a low ratio between thermal emittance and solar absorbance at the operating temperatures. For opaque materials, like in our case (in all cases, we measured transmittance values lower than 0.1% in the wavelength range from 1.4 to 25 μm, with sample thicknesses of few millimeters), the Kirchoff’s law applies. Therefore, the directional spectral emissivity ɛ′(λ) is equal to the directional spectral absorptivity α′(λ) and for the energy conservation it is given by ε′(λ)=1−ρ′∩(λ),where ρ′∩ (λ) is the spectral directional hemispherical reflectivity (i.e., the spectral reflectivity measured for light coming from a single incidence direction and for light reflected into the whole half space in front of the surface, like measurements performed with an integrating sphere). The directional emissivity ɛ′λ1,λ2 in the wavelength range (λ1, λ2) is related to the spectral directional emissivity ɛ′ (λ) by the equation ɛλ1,λ2′=∫λ1λ2ɛ(λ)⋅B(λ)dλ∫λ1λ2B(λ)dλ,where B(λ) is the blackbody spectral radiance. The total solar directional absorptivity α′S of the sample is calculated integrating the spectral directional absorptivity α′(λ) on the Sun emission spectrum S(λ), according to the equation αS′=∫​λmin⁡λmax⁡(1−ρ′∩(λ))⋅S(λ)dλ∫​λmin⁡λmax⁡S(λ)dλ,Hence, we can conclude that the measurement of spectral reflectivity is the starting point to estimate both sunlight absorption and thermal emission characteristics of samples. It should be noticed that, for a precise assessment of the material potential in solar furnaces, the characterization of the spectral behavior must be done at the furnace operating temperature (that is expected to be lower than 1400 K: notice that the materials requirements for volumetric solar absorber are a resistance to temperatures of about 1300 K). Since high-temperature reflectivity or emissivity measurements require the use of complex apparatuses and long measurement times, 41–48 a preliminary choice among the various materials to identify the most promising ones is absolutely mandatory, and this was the purpose of the present work. In fact, literature data on many different materials (metals ,49 semiconductors ,50 dielectrics51) show that if the material does not undergo phase or surface changes, the spectral reflectivity or emissivity curve shapes do not dramatically change. In this case, the curves showed changes in intensity while retaining the qualitative shape of the room temperature curve. Therefore, S-shaped curves do not translate into band structures and conversely, even if, for curves of the former type, a change in the cutoff spectral position can be expected. From the acquired hemispherical reflectance spectra, we calculated the room-temperature solar directional absorptivity α′S according to Eq. (3), using as S(λ) the CIE Sun spectrum with air mass = 1.5 (Ref. 52) and λmin = 0.3 µm, λmax = 2.3 µm. The calculated values of α′S are listed in Table IV. TaC-based materials show the lowest solar absorptivity, with similar values lying around 0.4 for all samples, independently from sample porosity and sintering aid used during synthesis. ZrC-based samples have a slightly higher solar absorptivity (somewhat higher than 0.5), with 0.59 the maximum value obtained for the pure dense sample ZC99 and with no differences between the two other investigated samples (both being nearly fully dense and with MoSi2 addition). HfC-based materials show a higher spread among the investigated samples. Among UHTCs, the best solar absorber is HC67, with a solar hemispherical absorptivity near to 0.9, even higher than that of silicon carbide (SC100, about 0.8). From these calculations, even if they were performed on room-temperature spectra as explained, we can conclude that for UTCHs, the spectral features in the wavelength region of solar spectrum strongly depend on the base material, with practically no dependence on the sintering aid (except for the HfC case that needs additional investigations). As for the effect of sample porosity, it seems that solar absorptivity is higher if the sample density is lower than about 70%, with no absorptivity dependence on porosity for density values in the 90%–100% range (10%–0% porosities). Even if it seems reasonable to expect some light trapping effects within the surface pores, the study of optical properties on a higher range of porosity levels is needed to obtain conclusive results about this effect, so it will be the subject of further investigations. When the comparison between SiC and carbide UHTCs is concerned, SiC appears a better solar absorber owing to its lower VIS-NIR reflectivity. UHTCs are expected to show a lower thermal emissivity than silicon carbide, thanks to their higher reflectivity in the medium-infrared region. Thus to have also a qualitative estimation of the expected thermal emissivity of samples, we calculated from the acquired spectra the directional emissivity in the wavelength range 0. 3–25 μm using Eq. (2). In the calculation, we considered as B(λ) the blackbody spectrum at 1200 K. Results are summarized in Table IV. The lowest emissivity (lower than 0.2) is shown by TaC-based dense materials, while the majority of ZrC-based samples show values around 0.2. Like in the solar absorptivity calculation, HfC-based samples show a spread of emissivity values, ranging from about 0.2 to 0.3 for dense pellets and about 0.5 for the porous one. In general, samples with a significant porosity have a considerably larger thermal emissivity than similar dense materials (see TC76 and HC67 cases), as expected. SiC has by far the largest thermal emissivity among the materials under study, corresponding to a α′/ɛ′ ratio of about 1. These qualitative considerations are confirmed by recent high-temperature measurements reporting for ZrC, TaC, and HfC a considerable lower emissivity than SiC. It should be noticed that for solar receiver applications, a low thermal emissivity is a very important parameter, as it governs radiative thermal losses in the heated absorber and thus the maximum allowable operating temperature. Moreover UHTCs have satisfactory thermo-mechanical properties at high temperature (equivalently to SiC). On the other hand, possible concerns for the use of carbides for this application are poor resistance to oxidation, which implies their use under vacuum or inert atmosphere, and current high costs of raw materials, especially for HfC powders. From these very preliminary considerations, it appears clear that the quantitative assessment of UHTC performances for this new solar application is a very complex task that includes the evaluation of several parameters. In this work, we give a basic evaluation of the spectrally selective characteristics of UHTCs, together with the identification of the most relevant parameters to take into account for the proposed application. The final identification of the best performing material(s) necessarily needs complex high temperature measurements and a choice between different tradeoffs. When the comparison between UHTCs and SiC is concerned, it should be noticed that although thermo-mechanical requirements are equivalently satisfied by both classes of ceramics, the more favorable optical characteristics and above all the low emissivity at high temperatures of ultra-refractory carbides seem to be the most important advantage with respect to SiC that has been evidenced by this study.
This work examined the intrinsic spectral selectivity of different carbide samples of UHTCs for new applications as sunlight absorbers in tower solar plants. The investigation has been performed in the wavelength range from 0.25 to 25 μm, which allows showing a high intrinsic spectral selectivity for the majority of tested samples, as they reach a low reflectivity at the wavelengths of solar emission and a high reflectivity at the wavelengths of thermal infrared. Directional solar absorptivity has been calculated for most of them, showing that, for a given carbide type, the use of sintering aids does not affect the solar absorber features. Nevertheless, the various investigated carbide families showed distinctive features in the UV-VIS spectra that result in different performances in the field of sunlight absorption. Among the investigated materials, the highest value of solar absorptivity has been measured for hafnium carbide-based porous samples, while the lowest corresponds to dense tantalum carbide. Directional emissivity in the wavelength range 0. 3–25 μm has been calculated as well, allowing to expect from UHTCs a considerably lower emissivity with respect to the reference SiC ceramics. These results will be cross-compared with high temperature emissivity investigations for a quantitative assessment of UHTC potentialities and performances as solar absorbers and solar energy storage materials.