The performance characteristics of a new synchrotron x-ray powder diffraction beamline (I11) at the Diamond Light Source are presented. Using an in-vacuum undulator for photon production and deploying simple x-ray optics centered around a double-crystal monochromator and a pair of harmonic rejection mirrors, a high brightness and low bandpass x-ray beam is delivered at the sample. To provide fast data collection, 45 Si(111) analyzing crystals and detectors are installed onto a large and high precision diffractometer. High resolution powder diffraction data from standard reference materials of Si, α-quartz, and LaB6 are used to characterize instrumental performance.
Since many naturally occurring and manufactured materials exist in powder or polycrystalline forms high resolution x-ray powder diffraction beamlines are available at nearly every synchrotron facility world wide. The exceptionally bright (i.e., intense and highly collimated) x-ray beams delivered to these instruments allows data to be collected with a quality and resolution not attainable using more conventional sources. In third generation low-emittance light sources, beam brightness is further increased when diffraction instruments are sourced by insertion devices such as multipole wigglers or undulators, offering the opportunity for making further significant advances in both the quality and nature of the obtainable data. The Materials Science Beamline (X04SA) (Ref. 1) at the Swiss Light Source (SLS) and the high resolution powder diffraction beamline (ID31) (Ref. 2) at the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF), for example, provide x-ray beams of a brightness (photon/s/mrad2/0.1%BW) and incident flux at the sample that is two to three orders of magnitude higher than conventional bending magnets. High brightness is important for low bandpass detection and to achieve the highest angular (and hence d-space) resolution, it has become increasingly evident that the use of single crystals with narrow rocking curves (∼1 mdeg or 17 μrad at 15 keV) is necessary to analyze the diffracted signal, replacing the traditional slits or parallel foils arrangements of earlier instruments . 3,4 As well as improving the collimation/resolution of the diffracted beam impinging on the detector, allowing previously overlapped peaks to be resolved, the inherent low energy bandpass (ΔE/E∼10−4) of the analyzing crystal improves signal-to-noise ratios by dramatically reducing background contributions. This is of particular benefit to experiments involving strong sample fluorescence and Compton scattering. The main disadvantages however have been the hitherto long experimental times required to scan large angular ranges in 2θ using small steps (Δ2θ∼ 1–5 mdeg) and the long detector accumulation times required to compensate for the large reduction in the intensity of the analyzed signal reaching the detector. This last factor alone restricted their widespread application on earlier generations of synchrotron powder diffractometers. However, solutions have been developed that employ multiple crystals located systematically in the scattering plane. These follow two basic design concepts: (i) multiaxis instruments with one crystal mounted on each axial assembly distributed around the 2θ circle 5 and (ii) single-axis instruments consisting of a multianalyzing crystal (MAC) assembly with a fixed, prealigned angular offset between each crystal. Beamlines ID31 (ESRF) and X04SA (SLS), for example, have successfully deployed MAC systems of nine and five crystals, respectively, based on the design of Hodeau et al.,6 while the new 11BM beamline at the Advanced Photon Source has recently commissioned a twelve-analyzer detector system. In designing and constructing a new undulator-sourced powder diffraction beamline (I11) for Diamond, the UK’s new third generation synchrotron light source, we have however adopted a hybrid approach. This combines the intensity recovery characteristics of the MAC concept with the short angular scan range of the multiple axis approach, to produce a new powder instrument that provides high peak to background ratios and high resolution x-ray diffraction data with short data collection times and high sample throughput. The technical design was peer reviewed in July 2005 and the beamline is now entering user operations. The key features and specifications of the beamline design, prior to construction, are summarized in Tang et al. We present here the results of performance benchmarking for the high resolution measurement mode of the new I11 powder instrument, along with details of the x-ray beam and beamline performance characteristics.
X-RAY SOURCE AND 
 The layout and approximate distances from the x-ray source of the various beamline components is shown in Fig. 1. The source itself is an in-vacuum undulator (IVU) insertion device located in the main electron storage ring. The 2 m device has an array of 90 permanent magnets (Sm2Co17) with a period length of 22 mm (U22) designed to produce x- rays ranging from 5 to 30 keV. The theoretical tuning curve of flux density for the U22 device is shown in Fig. 2(a) and was specified as a day-1 deliverable. The magnetic lattice is also designed to produce an intense x-ray beam in the low energy region 5–6 keV using a reduced gap [ 5–7 mm, Fig. 2(a)—inset]. The relative flux densities as a function of tuned energy at the sample position are shown in Fig. 2(b). The measurements are based on standard Si 1 1 1 and LaB6 1 1 0 powder peak intensities, to represent materials with, respectively, low and high absorption. Highest flux is obtained at medium energies ( 11–20 keV), decaying quickly beyond 20 keV. The beams produced by these devices in a third generation synchrotron such as Diamond have a low divergence of ∼25 μrad (vertical) and ∼100 μrad (horizontally), which should result in a small final beam size at the sample position. Using the primary slits to trim the beam edges, Fig. 3 shows images of the beam taken from a 45° fluorescence screen placed in the beam after Slits 4 (Fig. 1) and measured beam profiles obtained by scanning the slits with small vertical and horizontal apertures. These dimensions match the typical size range for powder samples (capillary or flat plate) which, for routine measurements, removes the need for further complicated focusing optics and alignment procedures. To reduce potential contamination of the x-ray beam by gas bremsstrahlung radiation from collisions occurring within the main electron ring, the I11 undulator is canted by 1 mrad, with small bending magnets located either end being used to steer the electron beam in and out of the device. The optics hutch is approximately 4 m high, 10 m long, and 2.5 m wide with walls constructed from steel and lead panels. The main components are: (i) water cooled primary slits which trim the white beam from the undulator; (ii) double-crystal-monochromator (DCM) comprising two liquid nitrogen cooled Si(111) crystals; (iii) double bounce harmonic rejection mirrors (HRM); (iv) two sets of monochromatic slits; and (v) an embedded intensity monitor Io comprising a thin 45° Kapton scattering foil and scintillation counter (located after Slits3). To alleviate the heat load on the DCM crystals, a closed-circuit liquid nitrogen cooling system incorporating a cryocooler reservoir is used to maintain the crystals at a constant temperature. The measured full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) of 0.00149(2)° at E=15 keV, obtained by rocking the top crystal, appears close to the theoretical value. Although this is not a true rocking curve measurement, it does nevertheless indicate the effectiveness of the cryogenic cooling system. Changes in energy of the monochromatic beam are effected by changing the undulator gap and rotating the DCM crystals. A fixed exit-height beam geometry across all energies is maintained by adjusting the separation distance of the two crystals. To ensure the purity of the monochromatic beam, the HRM assembly is located downstream of the DCM and to maintain the fixed exit-height geometry this is also a double bounce device. The mirrors reduce contamination of the monochromatic beam by higher energy (e.g., λ/3) photons, which could otherwise be problematic for low energy experiments. Although the same effect can be achieved by misaligning the second DCM crystal, fine-tuning the DCM in this way is more likely to introduce beam instability and is more difficult to manage, or automate, in terms of beamline user-friendliness. The HRM assembly consists of a pair of parallel Si mirrors (900×80×50 mm3) each having a three-stripe surface (width=20 mm) along their length. The stripes are one of bare polished Si and one each of high purity Rh and Pt deposited coatings. The operational angle is fixed at 2.5 mrad and to provide adequate rejection over the beamline’s specified energy range, the assembly is translated across the beam such that: (i) Si surface is used for energies below 10 keV, (ii) Rh coating for energies between 10 and 22 keV, and (iii) Pt coating for energies above 22 keV.
Diffractometer
 The experimental hutch, again constructed from steel and lead panels, is located downstream of the optics hutch and is approximately 9.7 m in length, 5.0 and 3.9 m wide at either end and 4.0 m in height. The center-piece is a large, heavy duty diffractometer (DIF) with three coaxial, high precision rotary stages (θ-, 2θ-, and δ-circle) as shown in Fig. 4 (top). This was designed and custom-built by Newport (France) to our specifications. Each of the circles has Renishaw 20 μm pitch encoders with 0.000045° resolution. From laser auto-collimation measurements, the parallelism between each of the circles is 20 μrad, equating to a ±5 μm axial uncertainty, while the circle of confusion for the motion of each of the θ-, 2θ-, and δ-axes is 8, 7, and 8 μm, respectively. Together, these measurements define orthogonal spheroidal diameters and equate to an overall sphere error of ∼10 μm. The measured cylinder of confusion for the relative motion of the θ- and 2θ-circles is 13.1 μm and for the θ- and δ-circles is 12.9 μm. The three circles are mounted on a large granite base with motorized xyz movement for accurate positioning of the instrument’s center of rotation in the x-ray beam. To facilitate the routing of services to sample cells etc. the θ-circle has a 200 mm diameter aperture open at each end that runs through the center of the diffractometer. The mounting of sample stages is then via a precision machined face plate that bolts directly onto the end of the θ-circle, located via a machined recess. For ambient measurements, a capillary or flat-plate sample spinner mounted at the center of a θ-circle face plate is used to accept prealigned specimens attached to magnetic holders. An industrial robotic arm (ROB) and 200-sample carousel (CAR) have also been installed for the automated “pick and place” of samples in high throughput experiments (Fig. 4—top). Noncontact sample environments (N2 cryostream and hot gas blower) mounted on the large motorized sample Table (XYZ) can also be used in this mode. Alternatively, samples in capillary, flat-plate holder or nonambient environment sample cell can be attached to a small motorized xyz-table that mounts on the θ-circle in place of the prealigned spinner. Larger, more bulky, nonambient apparatus (cryogenic devices and furnaces) for measurements in the range of 4–1700 K and a variety of sample mounting and aligning stages are also available. An embedded intensity monitor Ie of the sample type as Io in the optics hutch is located after Slits4, to allow data to be normalized to changes in the monochromatic beam. For high resolution measurements, the large 2θ-circle provides the scanning of positive angles (above the beam) via the use of five MAC stages, while time-resolved (<1 s per pattern) measurements are provided for by a wide-angle position sensitive detector (PSD) mounted on the δ-circle. Using multiple Mythen-2 modules 10 as its detection elements, the PSD has been designed to have a 90° aperture and an intrinsic angular resolution of 0.01° or better. However, since the PSD was not defined as a day-1 deliverable, commissioning of this device is still ongoing and the performance characteristics of this device will be reported separately.
MAC and 
 Perfect Si or Ge crystals have long been recognized as suitable analyzers for synchrotron powder beamlines . 11,12 The narrowness of their rocking curves means that the final instrumental resolution is governed almost entirely by the vertical divergence of the x-ray beam. Although Ge crystals are sometimes preferred over Si due to their higher intensity throughput (i.e., integrated reflectivity), Si(111) crystals better meet the I11 diffraction resolution requirement 9 since, at any given energy, the Si(111) rocking curve is two to three times narrower than a Ge crystal of the same crystallographic orientation. The sacrifice in intensity is more than compensated for by the high photon flux incident at the sample from the beamline's undulator source. The design of the I11 MAC system is based on the Hodeau et al. concept. However, to speed up data collection, five identical nine-crystal MAC-arms deploying a total of 45 crystals and detectors (Table I) are mounted on the 2θ-circle at 30° intervals (Fig. 4—bottom). The MAC configuration is essentially a two-circle (α-2α) concentric rotary stage with nine analyzing crystals mounted on the α-circle such that they are stacked with a designed angular offset relative to the 2θ position of the MAC arms of n=−8°, −6°, −4°, −2°, 0°, 2°, 4°, 6°, and 8°; while nine corresponding detectors are mounted systematically on the 2α-circle such that they are in the Bragg condition for the Si 1 1 1 reflections from each of the nine crystals. Changes in energy of the incident x-ray beam are accommodated by coupled α and 2α rotations to maintain this condition. The detectors themselves were specifically designed and developed for this instrument and their performance characteristics have been reported elsewhere. For a fixed operational energy, 45 powder patterns are thus measured simultaneously by each crystal-detector combination as 2θ is scanned. To obtain whole pattern coverage (e.g., 5°–145°2θ) the diffractometer needs only to scan the 30° angular range between arms plus a few degrees extra to provide sufficient overlap such that all 2θ angles are sampled by at least nine crystals. The 45 recorded patterns are converted in to a series of sequentially overlapping patterns in 2θ by correcting the single measured 2θ (corresponding to the middle crystal on the first arm) by the respective angular offsets of the arms and crystals, the 45 patterns can then be merged into a single pattern. In this way the data statistics are increased (over those of a conventional single crystal-detector pair scanned through the whole 2θ range) while data collection times are improved by reducing both the scanned angular range and the integration time required for each individual detector. A key feature of the mechanical design of the MAC stages that ensures their successful operation is that both the slots for the crystals on the 2α mounting plate and the individual crystal holders were specified to tight machining tolerances (0.005°). This removes the need to provide any mechanism for individually aligning each crystal. A hub is placed over the crystals for protection and sealed against the mounting plate. As shown in Fig. 4 (bottom), there are baffles before and after the crystals. The front baffle is designed to hold a set of vertical foils to reduce axial divergence, while the back baffle contains coarse equatorial plates between adjacent crystal channels to avoid “cross-talk” between beams from different channels. For the present work, axial divergence foils were not used in order to maximize intensity throughput. Both the baffles and crystal hub have thin Kapton windows for the entrance and exit of the diffracted and analyzed beams. To reduce the air scatter path length, all three are designed to operate under vacuum, via rotary pump, or be filled with light gas (e.g., He). The detectors mount in precision machined slots in plates located on the 2α circles, with each plate also having a linear translator to change the crystal-to-detector distance. This compensates for the movement of the diffracted beam along the crystal surface as the operational energy is changed, maintaining the analyzed beam at the detector center. The optimal positions for the crystals and detectors, on their respective mounting plates, were determined by ray-tracing.
For well ordered specimens, the narrow rocking width of the analyzer crystals coupled to the low divergence of the undulator source means that 2θ intervals of 1 to 2 mdeg are required to adequately resolve diffraction peaks. Data collection based on the step scanning of whole patterns, even if sub-second counting times are used, will take many hours, due to the move-stop-settle-count nature of the diffractometer motion. In common with other beamlines deploying MAC devices, a constant velocity trajectory (CVT) scan mode is therefore employed on I11. In this mode, the time required for the total scan is specified by the user and a motion trajectory (including ramp up and ramp down) is calculated such that the diffractometer's 2θ circle moves at a constant angular speed through the range of interest. During the scan the detectors are gated at sufficient frequency to give a nominal 2θ interval of 0.0008° and 2θ values recorded from the 2θ-circle encoders. The diffractometer is controlled by a Newport XPS controller which communicates with the beamline data acquisition system via an EPICS (Ref. 14) interface (open source software: http://www.aps.anl.gov/epics/index.php). Calculation of the trajectory is done at the EPICS level and passed to the XPS for asynchronous execution. Each trajectory contains 3500 elements and the range of movement is calculated such that velocity ramp-up and ramp-down lie outside the desired collection range. During a scan, encoder positions and detector counts are stored in accumulating memory and on completion the 2θ encoder positions, 45 MAC detector and two monitor signals per 2θ point are written to an ASCII file. Postscan software then merges the individual patterns into a single diffraction pattern. Since multiple diffraction patterns are recorded simultaneously against a single recorded rotation in 2θ, the first stage in merging the data is to adjust the measured 2θ by the arm and crystal offset for each crystal. Each 2θ-intensity pair from each of the 45 2θ-adjusted patterns are then binned into a single array covering the entire 2θ range (e.g., 5°–145°) with a fixed 2θ interval of 0.001°. However, slight irregularities in the 2θ-circle motion (due to deviations from the theoretical trajectory and small irregular delay times in the control electronics triggering the encoder read) mean that each recorded 2θ value has a small random offset. This, combined with the constant motion of the 2θ-circle, means that any given 2θ interval in the 45 adjusted patterns will have: (a) integration times smaller or larger than the nominal 0.0008° 2θ interval and (b) a range in 2θ that may straddle more than one bin. The measured intensities in these instances are divided proportionately between bins.
First diffraction
 Figure 5(a) shows the 1 1 1 peaks of SRM 640c silicon (from National Institute of Standards and Technology, USA) at 11 keV (λ=1.1269 Å) measured from the nine analyzing crystals in the first arm (MAC1). The 2θ-axis of each peak was adjusted to the center crystal (reference, n=0) by adding n+Δ, where Δ is the small angular deviation per crystal from its designed value, due to crystal miss-cut and possible mounting strain. These real offsets (n+Δ) were determined from peak positions for each crystal obtained by fitting the measured peaks. The distribution of the deviations is well within ±0.1° as expected from our control measures. Figure 5(a) (inset) shows the 1 1 1 peak extracted from the processed powder pattern. The merging of the nine signals has produced a strong peak without the need for a corresponding increase in detector counting time, while the narrow angular collimation of the analyzing crystals results in a narrow peak width (i.e., high resolution). The FWHM (∼0.01°) is greater than the intrinsic Si(111) rocking curve at this energy and arises from sample broadening contributions (particle size and strain). Since no vertical collimation foils were used, the peak shape is asymmetric with an extended low angle tail due to the effect of axial divergence. To demonstrate the resolving power of the instrument, Fig. 5(b) shows diffraction scans of the 2 1 2, 2 0 3, 3 0 1 quartz peaks (SRM 1878a). These normally overlapping peaks appear well separated in 2θ. The crystal offsets for the other four MAC-arms were determined using higher order reflections. The distribution of data is again well within ±0.1° for the majority of the crystals, as shown in Fig. 6(a), and the overall spread is within ±0.2°. The trend in the angular offsets is reproducible and independent of energy. As the arm positions may also deviate slightly from their design values of 0°, 30°, 60°, 90°, and 120°, they too need to be measured. These were determined using profile refinements on data summed only over the range covered by each arm. With the 2θ-axis shifted by the corresponding design values, refinement of the zero points enabled us to determine the small arm offsets. Given the measured crystal and arm offsets, data from all of the MAC-arms can be merged to produce a single powder pattern. Figure 6(b) is an example of a processed pattern obtained from the silicon sample using a 1 h CVT scan at 15 keV. Good fits to the peak shapes were achieved using the pseudo-Voigt (PV) analytical function in TOPAS software. Refinement R-factors of Rexp=8.22% and Rwp=9.76% were obtained including the high angle data (2θ up to 150°), indicating the overall good fit to the data. Note that the pattern is free from spurious peaks from high harmonic contaminations and shielding leaks.

 The mechanical stability of the MAC-arms was tested using (i) static and (ii) scanning mode. Again, diffraction peaks from SRM 640c silicon powder were used (E=15 keV). In static mode, the diffractometer and MAC-arms were driven to a Si powder peak position and repeated measurements of the peak intensity made. Figure 7(a) shows the peak intensity of the Si 4 2 2 reflection measured by the central crystal-detector (mac25) on MAC2-arm. The intensity of the incident beam was recorded using the embedded monitor (Ie) with a 1 s integration time for 1 h (top trace), and simultaneously the peak intensity was measured (bottom trace). Both sets of data display the 600 s frequency of the top up injection of the electron beam (∼250 mA). Once the peak data were normalized to the monitor intensities [Fig. 7(b)], 95% of the 3600 data points were within ±2√N and 99% within ±3√N, where N(=46096) is the mean count, as expected from a distribution conforming to Poisson statistics. The measurement was repeated on the other MAC-arms and the same stable data observed [e.g., the 8 2 2 peak measured on MAC3-arm shown in Fig. 7(c)], confirming the static mechanical stability. In scanning mode, we selected powder peaks to be measured by the center crystals on each of the five arms: 2 2 0 for MAC1, 4 2 2 for MAC2, 8 2 2 for MAC3, 10 4 2 for MAC4, and 10 6 4/12 2 2 for MAC5. The powder peaks were repeatedly scanned at hourly intervals (up to 14 h) and the peak positions, obtained from fitting the data with a PV function, are shown in Figs. 8(a)–8(e). The small spread of data on each arm (lower angle MACs∼±0.04 mdeg and higher angle MACs∼±0.4 mdeg) clearly demonstrates the good scanning mechanical stability. The slow apparent drift with time of the peak positions to lower values is due to a small shift in the wavelength (Δλ/λ∼3×10−6) of the incident beam; caused either by thermal drift of the monochromator or a small amount of movement in the electron beam (approximately a few micrometers). In a user experiment, powder pattern collection times are typically 15–60 min. The peak positions were therefore measured with quick successive scans and the results for MAC1 and MAC5 arms, for example, are shown in Fig. 8(f). Again, only a small spread in the data was observed. The static and scanning mode results confirm the stability of both the mechanical MAC design and of the entire instrument. During installation, the HRM assembly was precisely surveyed into position. Once the mirrors were driven to intercept the monochromatic beam, the first mirror was used to steer it into the experimental hutch and to the center of the diffractometer. The effectiveness of the harmonic rejection was illustrated by measuring the Si 1 1 1 peak using the center crystal-detector of MAC1-arm with a 6 keV (λ=2.066 Å) beam (Fig. 9). Without the mirror system, the peak shown in (a) corresponds to λ and (b) when the crystal/detector was tuned to λ/3 (E=18 keV). With the HRM assembly in the beam, the measurements were repeated and the λ peak was observed as before (a′) while the harmonic λ/3 peak was absent (b′). Note that the asymmetric peak shape in (b) is due to axial divergence. Although the HRM system is designed to cover the operational energy range ( 5–30 keV), we found that it was only necessary at low energies (E≤10 keV), due to the rapid decay of the spectral emission from the undulator.
IRF and detection
 The instrumental resolution function (IRF), or the detection width (Δ2θ), as a function of 2θ can be determined from the powder pattern of a high quality sample. The diffraction pattern shown in Fig. 10(a) was measured for LaB6 (SRM 660a) at 15 keV with peaks up to 145° 2θ (without HRM assembly). The data were fitted using the fundamental parameter method (FPM) (Ref. 16) in TOPAS and mechanical details were obtained: Lorentzian [2.028(6) μm] and Gaussian [0.694(2) μm] crystallite sizes and strain (Gaussian) of 0.0119(3). Fitting the peaks with a PV function, allowed the FWHM (or Δ2θ) as a function of 2θ to be determined as a representation of the instrumental function, as plotted in Fig. 10(b) (main plot). To a good approximation, the IRF for a powder instrument using analyzing crystals can be calculated from the equation 4,17 belowΔ2θ={Ψ2(2m−m′−1)2+12(m′−2m)2ΔM2+ΔA2}1/2,where m=tan θ/tan θM and m′=tan θA/tan θM with θM and θA are the Bragg angles for the DCM and analyzer crystal; Ψ is the vertical divergence of the incident beam, and the contribution from the Darwin widths of the monochromator and analyzing crystals are ΔM and ΔA, respectively. At this energy, with the angular settings, θM=θA=7.564°, Eq. (1) reduces toΔ2θ={Ψ2[2(m−1)]2+12(1−2m)2ΔM2+ΔA2}1/2.
Applying the above equation, the resolution function was calculated using the measured beam divergence Ψ≈15 μrad and the theoretical width of 17.6 μrad for ΔM and ΔA. The results are also plotted in Fig. 10(b) for comparison. However, there are noticeable discrepancies between the experimental and calculated data, particularly at low angles. The additional broadenings are likely to be from the effects of particle size and/or strain as indicated by the fitted results from Fig. 10(a). In addition, the Williamson–Hall plot (Lorentzian components βL of the PV FWHM, where βL∗=βL cos θ/λ and d∗=2 sin θ/λ) clearly shows the particle size contribution [Fig. 10(b) inset—top left]. The intercept gives an average value of 2.14(2) μm which is in good agreement with the certified domain size of 2.0 μm. Further measurements were performed using a capillary specimen of Na2Ca3Al2F14 (NAC) which is known to produce narrower powder peaks than LaB6,19 [Fig. 10(b) inset—bottom right]. The NAC data at lower angles is much closer to the calculated curve indicating that the LaB6 discrepancies are due to the sample rather than instrumental in origin. Note that broadening due to axial divergence is not included in the FWHM data. When compared with the lanthanide compound, the NAC specimen appears to have larger particles with an average size of 3.54(2) μm (Lorentzian) and is essentially strain free according to our best FPM refinement. The particle size for NAC is consistent with the result (3.6 μm) previously obtained for this material by Masson et al. The detection limit of the MAC system was tested with a powder mixture of 99.9 wt % TiO2 (SRM 674a) and 0.1 wt % Si (SRM 640c) and Fig. 11 presents the powder pattern from a long data collection time (10 h), including the fitted data from Rietveld refinement. Although the silicon signals are “dwarfed” by the oxide the good instrumental contrast enabled the detection of weak Si peaks, as shown in the expanded plot for the Si 1 1 1 reflection (Fig. 11—inset). As the statistical errors are less than the plotted data, this exercise demonstrates that a few hours of data collection would be adequate for the detection of a trace material in a mixture down to one part per thousand.
We have designed and constructed a new powder diffraction facility, Beamline I11, at the Diamond Light Source (UK). High brightness radiation is generated by an IVU and a low bandpass x-ray beam is produced by a double-bounce Si(111) monochromator and harmonic rejection mirrors. Monochromatic beam is delivered to the center of the high precision diffractometer located in the experimental hutch. High resolution powder diffraction is achieved through a combination of beam quality (low divergence and high purity) and the tight angular acceptance of the analyzer crystals. In addition, the special design of five MAC arms on the 2θ-circle to carry 45 individual analyzer-detector channels enables the fast collection of Rietveld quality powder data. The results of measurements demonstrating good instrumental stability, high resolution and wide dynamic range (detection level) have been presented. This new facility is now operational and is routinely accepting users from a wide range of research disciplines.