The Southern Australian margin is one of the most energetic regions in the world suitable for the extraction of wave energy for electricity generation. We have produced a data set in which the deep-water wave energy resource for the region is described by three representative deep-water wave states, equivalent to the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles of the deep-water wave energy flux, derived from archives of the USA National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) WaveWatch III (NWW3) operational wave model. The Simulating WAves Nearshore (SWAN) wave model is then applied along the full Southern Australian margin to propagate these representative wave states into the near-shore region to quantify the effects of shallow water processes such as refraction, shoaling, and bottom friction. The wave energy incident on the 25-m isobath (∼ 30–50 kW/m) is approximately 35%–50% less than the World Energy Council estimates of offshore wave energy but is approximately 20% greater than the energy observed from long-term buoy deployments on the midshelf. The latter discrepancy is attributed to an overestimation of significant wave height along the Southern Australian margin by the NWW3 model. The near-shore model applied in this study adequately simulates the attenuation of wave heights across the continental shelf when compared with estimates of wave height attenuation obtained from the Topex satellite altimeter. The attenuation of wave energy across the continental shelf reduces the estimates of offshore wave energy as given by the World Energy Council; however the wave energy resource incident on the Southern Australian margin remains considerable. We estimate that if 10% of the incident near-shore energy in this region, which is an ambitious target when conversion efficiency is considered, were converted to electricity, approximately 130 TW h/yr (one-half of Australia’s total present-day electricity consumption) would be produced.
The Australian Government has set a 20% target for renewable energy by 2020 to expand the use of renewable energy as part of its commitment to reduce Australia’s greenhouse gas emissions by 60% on 2000 levels by 2050.1 To achieve this goal, an additional 45,000 GW h/yr of renewable energy will have to be produced by 2020. Wave energy has a number of advantages over other renewable energy sources. Environmentally, impacts occur during the construction and installation processes. Once in operation, wave energy has the potential to provide a clean source of energy with no greenhouse gas emissions while posing minimal impacts on the environment. A noteworthy advantage of wave energy conversion devices is that many have a low visibility profile. Seafloor designs are essentially invisible, while surface designs protrude only a few meters above the ocean surface and are barely seen when installed several kilometers offshore. These features make wave energy more appealing to nearby residents who have objected to wind turbines (and solar farms) on the grounds that they spoil coastal areas of high recreational value. Objections to wave energy farms have been made by competing industry sectors (e.g., transport and fishers) on grounds of the potential hazard to navigation and access to resources, recreational users (e.g., surfers) on grounds of the potential for reducing incident coastal wave energy, and public utilities commissions (e.g., electricity corporations) on grounds of the high cost per unit energy associated with high maintenance expenses in early stages of the industry. Uncertainties remain on the effects of long-term deployment of wave generation devices on the marine and coastal environments. The Wave Hub site in the United Kingdom is providing a useful test bed for research in this field. A fundamental aspect to tapping wave energy is resource characterization. Initial estimates of wave energy potential have identified the Southern margin of the Australian continent as one of the most energetic wave climates suitable for wave energy generation. The World Energy Council 4 estimates, however, are based on deep-water information, while wave energy generation systems are typically positioned relatively near to shore, with the “offshore” systems positioned in depth ranges of 30–50 m. Wave energy developers therefore require assessments of near-shore wave energy that take into account the various transformations that take place as waves propagate across the continental shelf. In this work, we aim to refine the estimates of near-shore wave energy potential for the world-class wave energy resource along the Southern Australian margin, taking into account the redistribution of wave energy density over the best available shallow water bathymetry (at 0.01° spatial resolution) for this 3000 km stretch of coast. We have used the long-term archives of the USA National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) WaveWatch III (NWW3) operational wave model ,7 which Hemer et al.8 identified as the most suitable wave model for the Australian region, to characterize the offshore, deep-water wave climate. Using this analysis of the deep-water wave data, the dominant and extreme sea-states were identified and propagated into the near-shore using the Simulating WAves Nearshore (SWAN) wave model ,9 which accounts for refraction, shoaling, bottom friction, and sheltering from coasts and islands. SWAN and WaveWatch III are both widely used spectral wave models that have been validated in a wide range of situations. Both models are governed by the same principle, where the evolution of the wave spectrum in space and time is described by conservation of action density being balanced by source terms representing generation, dissipation, and wave-wave interaction processes. The action density is the energy density divided by the relative frequency. WaveWatch III tends to be more efficient at global scales, whereas SWAN offers advantages at smaller scales 10 and its specific consideration of shallow water processes. The SWAN model was implemented for this study to make use of these advantages. The resultant map of wave energy resource is expected to complement the other issues that arise when determining suitable locations to extract wave energy such as proximity to ports, navigation routes, and aquaculture and fishing areas, as well as proximity to the energy grid. This paper is organized in five sections as follows. This Introduction is followed by Sec. II outlining the methods applied. Results of the study are presented in Sec. III. Section IV discusses the results in the context of Australia’s energy use, and Sec. V presents the main conclusions of the study.
Hemer et al.8 assessed a number of available wave models for the Australian region for their suitability to describing the Australian wave climate. The archived output of NOAA’s operational wave model, an implementation of the WaveWatch III model [NWW3 (Ref. 7)], was shown to compare best with waverider buoy data from 16 sites located on exposed sections of the Australian coast. However, NWW3 has two distinct limitations as an information resource for assessing wave energy potential. First, the model archives include only integrated wave parameters: significant wave height (Hs), which describes the largest 1/3 of the waves in the instantaneous wave field; peak wave period (Tp), which describes the most energetic waves in the spectrum; and peak wave direction (θp), which describes the direction of waves corresponding to Tp. The directional wave spectra are not available. Second, the spatial resolution of the NWW3 model is 1° latitude×1.25° longitude, and thus any climatology derived directly from the NWW3 archives is not directly applicable to the near-shore zone until the cross-shelf wave transformations are taken into account.
Deep-water wave 
 Spectral wave measurements along the South-Western Australian margin (here defined as extending from Perth to Hobart) indicate that the wave climate in this region is dominated by unimodal energy within the swell spectral band [i.e., waves with period greater than 8 s (Refs. 11 and 12)] The region is considered near enough to the extratropical storms, which generate the waves in the Southern Ocean, so that a little separation between the sea and swell bands is observed in the wave spectrum. The wave climate along the South-Western margin of the Australian continent is therefore adequately described as a unimodal wave climate, which can be characterized by the integrated wave parameters in the NWW3 archives. In contrast, the South-Eastern Australian margin receives waves from a large latitudinal range 13 spanning the Southern Tasman Sea to the Coral Sea in the North. As a consequence, a bimodal wave state often exists, so archives of spectrally integrated parameters (such as from NWW3) cannot accurately describe the wave climate along the South-Eastern Australian coast. Using the 10-yr ( 1997–2006), 6-hourly archives of Hs, Tp, and θp from the NWW3 wave model, a time-series of wave energy flux, EF, is calculated at all NWW3 grid points in the domain 110–155° E, 30–45° S, assuming a theoretical Pierson–Moskowitz 14 (PM64) spectral shape ,15 i.e.,EF=∫σ1σ2EPM(Hs,Tp,σ)cg(σ,h)dσ,where EPM(Hs,Tp,σ) is the PM64 wave energy spectrum as a function of Hs, Tp, and wave frequency σ and cg is the group wave speed as a function of σ and water depth h and is determined using the approach described in Hemer et al. Water depth is derived from the Geoscience Australia (GA) 0.01° bathymetry database ,17 averaged over the NWW3 grid cell. Tp, the only wave period parameter archived from NWW3, is not the preferred wave period parameter for conducting energy resource assessments. Ideally, the wave energy period, Te, derived from the zeroth and first negative moments of the frequency spectrum, is used for wave energy resource assessments, as Te corresponds to the weighted average of the wave energy. We overcome this data constraint by assuming a theoretical PM64 spectrum. Assuming deep-water wave conditions, the PM64 spectrum introduces the approximate relationship between Tp and the mean wave period Tz (Tp=1.4Tz), such that Eq. (1) reduces to the International Energy Agency’s recommended equation for determining wave energy flux from integrated wave parameters 18 (i.e. EF=0.577 TzHs2=0.412 TpHs2). By using Eq. (1), the need to assume deep-water wave conditions, which may not be appropriate for long swell as occurs on the South Australian continental shelf, is removed. The choice of a unimodal PM64 spectrum is appropriate for the fully developed unimodal sea (swell) observed along Australia’s South-Western margin. In regions with bimodal seas (e.g., the South-Eastern Australian continental margin), the recent development of theoretical multipeaked directional wave spectra 19 may enable extension of the approach taken in this study. In this study, we have limited our analysis to unimodal seas applicable to the South-Western Australian continental margin. The 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles of EF are determined at all NWW3 grid points (EF,10,m, EF,50,m, and EF,90,m, respectively) for each of the 12 months, m, of the year, and for the whole 10-yr archive (m= ∗). These parameters summarize the spatial and seasonal distribution of the wave energy resource for the Southern Australia deep-water region.
Near-shore wave 
 As waves travel over the continental shelf toward shallower water, they start to feel the sea-bed once the water depth is less than half the wavelength. A number of depth-dependent processes become important, including refraction, shoaling, and bottom friction. These shallow water processes may modify the spatial distribution of wave energy, typically observed as an attenuation of energy across the continental shelf. To quantify the wave energy in the near-shore and identify locations optimal for wave energy extraction, we applied the SWAN wave model to propagate specified wave conditions from deepwater into the near-shore regions of the Southern Australian margin. Ten midresolution (0.05° and ∼5 km) model domains were configured along the Southern margin of the Australian continent (Fig. 1). Bathymetry of each domain was derived from the 0.01° GA bathymetry. Each of the 0.05° model domains was chosen so that the seaward boundary aligned with the center of NWW3 grid points near to the continental shelf edge. A directional resolution of 5° and 35 frequency bins over the range of 0. 033–0.5 Hz were specified. Hemer 21 calibrated the wave model for the grid which contains the Cape de Couedic waverider buoy. Model parametrizations of bed friction, wind generation, and whitecapping parametrizations, the directional spreading of the boundary input directional wave spectrum, and the presence of quadruplet or triad wave-wave interactions were investigated. Calibration was carried out by minimizing error in the wave height simulation, being considered more important than the wave period. Using each parametrization, the model was run in stationary mode for 44 individual sea-states, with the timing of these runs corresponding to the time of satellite altimeter passes over the model domain. Hemer 21 found that in this region, wave conditions were well described using forcing from swell boundary conditions only (with no local wind forcing), with a root-mean-square error (Hs) of 0.5 m. In these circumstances, wind-growth and whitecapping source terms within SWAN are unnecessary, and Hemer 21 found that the calibration was largely insensitive to bed friction parametrization at these scales. The frictional drag law of Collins 22 was implemented, with a friction parameter, f, of 0.01 defined. Under these conditions, SWAN was most sensitive to the directional spreading factor (cosine power, p) of the incoming swell at the open boundaries of the domain, and a value of p=0.2 provided best model-data agreement. Following these calibration experiments, the same parameters were chosen for all model grids. The SWAN wave model was run in stationary mode for 39 representative sea-states, corresponding to EF,10,m, EF,50,m, and EF,90,m (for m=1..12 and  ∗ as defined above) for each midresolution domain. For the EF,X,m case (where X is the percentile 10, 50, or 90), representative wave conditions are chosen as the mean of those waves, which lie within the representative band of energy flux, i.e.,Hs,X,m=mean[Hs(tX,m)],Tp,X,m=mean[Tp(tX,m)],qp,X,m=arg[mean(eiθp(tX,m))],where tX,m are the times in the 10 year archive for which the month is m (m=1,…,12 or m= ∗, as defined above) and EF is within five percentile levels of the Xth percentile of EF. For example, the annual wave height associated with the 10th percentile of wave energy flux (EF,10,∗) was determined as the mean of all wave heights for which wave energy flux was greater than the 5th percentile of all EF values and less than the 15th percentile of all EF values. Boundary conditions for the midresolution domain runs were then defined by assuming a PM64-shaped spectrum and linearly interpolating between NWW3 grid cells along the open boundary. Landward of the nearest grid cell to the coast is assumed to have constant wave properties. Fine resolution (0.01°) near-shore wave properties were determined by nesting a total of 47 0.01° model domains within the ten midresolution 0.05° grids, which spanned the Southern Australian coast (Fig. 1). Default one-way SWAN nesting was used to force the 0.01° model runs, and the same SWAN parameters were used within the 0.01° model runs, as tuned for the parent 0.05° run. Therefore, in total, 2223 stationary SWAN model runs were carried out made up from 57 domains (ten 0.05° grids+47 0.01° grids) for three sea-state scenarios (10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles) for 13 temporal periods (m=1,…,12 and m= ∗, as defined above). The computational cost was approximately 40 h on a single 3.16 GHz Intel Xeon CPU, requiring approximately 6 GB RAM, and produced approximately 4 GB data.
Validation of wave height and energy
 Waverider buoy data from three sites located along the Southern Australian margin were used to validate the wave energy maps (Table I). Again, only integrated wave parameters (Hs and Tp) are archived from the waveriders, and consequently wave energy flux was determined using Eq. (1), assuming a PM64 spectral shape. 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles of wave energy flux at each of the three sites were determined for m=1,…,12 and m= ∗ (as defined above) and compared to modeled EF values from the closest 0.01° model grid cell. The corresponding Hs and Tp values were also compared. No directional data is available for model comparison. In order to assess the ability of the SWAN wave model to attenuate the wave heights across the continental shelf, we compared atlas-derived significant wave heights with wave heights estimated from TOPEX/Poseidon satellite altimeter records. Comparisons were made at offshore (DW) sites and continental shelf (SW) sites, which lie on eight specified ascending satellite tracks, which pass over the Southern Australian margin (Fig. 2). Significant wave heights were obtained at each of the 16 locations from the altimeter record for all available cycles between 1 and 481 (from October 1992 to October 2005). Data were rejected using the same procedure as specified in Hemer et al.23 and corrected using the calibration equations derived by Challenor and Cotton. The altimeter passes over each point once every 10 days. At each point, the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles of wave height were determined (m= ∗). These altimeter-derived HS percentiles were compared with corresponding estimates from the atlas, as was the ratio of the DW:SW HS in order to compare the modeled and observed rates of cross-shelf attenuation as well as the absolute energy levels. Recall that the atlas-derived percentile values are derived from percentiles of the energy flux and not just HS. We have measured the impact of the other factors (period and direction) in the energy flux by comparing variously derived percentiles using time-series data from the NWW3 model and found less than 1% difference between the different ways of defining the HS percentiles, so we treated the definitions as if they are equivalent.
Figures 3–6 display plots of NWW3 Hs versus Tp and Hs versus θp bivariate probability distribution functions (PDF) for four example NWW3 grid cells that were used to define boundary conditions for the near-shore models. Also shown on these plots are the corresponding Hs, Tp, and θp values associated with the three energy flux percentiles. For the Southern margin, (Figs. 3–5), the wave conditions associated with the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles of wave energy flux adequately describes the distribution of wave properties at these sites, as evidenced by the fact that the black dots lie in, or close to, high density regions of the wave parameter space. The same is not true, however, for the South-Eastern region (Fig. 6), where the distribution of wave properties is clearly bimodal, comprising a mix of eastward and westward propagation and short and long periods. Recalling that the data set analyzed here is unimodal on a day by day basis, this property of bimodality can only have come from the time dimension of the NWW3 data set. Analysis of the full spectral information would doubtlessly show an even greater spread of the wave direction statistics, which points to the relative importance of local wind forcing. Our omission of local wind forcing in the nested SWAN models is consistent with a focus on areas where the wave climate is unimodal and dominated by remotely generated waves. These conditions are not satisfied East of the Southern tip of Tasmania, so we have restricted the domain of our output data sets to the region where our approach is most valid, namely, the South-Western shelf as defined above. Since this is the region of greatest wave energy in Australia, we think it is an appropriate region on which to focus for the purposes of the Australian renewable energy industry.
Validation of wave height and energy
 The wave energy flux predicted by the near-shore high-resolution SWAN models exceeds the wave energy flux estimated from buoy data, for each of the three sites for almost the entire year, for each sea-state case (10th, 50th, and 90th EF percentiles; Fig. 7). For the 50th percentile (median) all-month estimates of energy flux, the relative errors of the model are 27%, 29%, and 6% at the three buoy locations (Table II). This is due to the modeled wave heights exceeding the observed heights by 16%, 17%, and 9%, an error that is partially offset by the modeled wave periods being too short (by 4%, 6%, and 9%) compared to the observations. The relative errors of the 10th percentile values are larger, while those of the 90th percentile values are smaller. For example, the 90th percentile model energy flux at Cape Sorell is 10% larger than the buoy estimate due to the height being 8% too great but the period 4% too short (Table II). In the deep ocean, where the best available validation data type is satellite altimetry, we find that the model estimates of wave height exceed the satellite estimates (Table III) by 5%–10% at all locations for the 10th percentile values and West of 135° E for the median values. The relative size of the 90th percentile values is inconsistent (alternating from track to track), but the relative errors are all less than 8%; many less than 5%. Recall that a principal motive of the present work was to model the attenuation of HS across the continental shelf for all locations across the South of Australia. Table III lists the ratio of deep and shallow water wave heights at the locations of the satellite tracks. The model and altimeter-based estimates of the attenuation rate agree well, with consistent values of about 0.9 for narrow-shelf regions and 0.7 or 0.8 where the shelf is wider.
Wave energy
 Our wave energy resource atlas consists of 156 maps of 0.01° resolution over the domain 113–147° E, 44. 5–29° S. The 156 maps are made up from four variables (wave energy flux, significant wave height, peak wave period, and peak wave direction) for 39 representative sea-states. These sea-states are defined as representing one of three (10th, 50th, or 90th) percentile levels of the wave energy flux for each of the individual months and for all months combined (m=1,…,12 and m= ∗, respectively). Figure 8 shows maps of the wave energy flux for the three all-month (m= ∗) percentile levels. Results for individual months are viewable via the Australian Federal Government’s Renewable Energy Atlas (http://www.environment.gov.au/sustainability/renewable/atlas/index.html) and a CSIRO Marine and Atmospheric Research Ocean Renewable Energy website (http://www.marine.csiro.au/~griffin/ORE, see Supplementary Material25). An inspection of the maps reveals both the value and limitations of our approach. The principal motivation of this work was to provide accurate estimates across Southern Australia of the degree of attenuation suffered by the deep ocean waves as they cross the continental shelf into the near-shore. This effect is seen quite clearly. There are also, however, a number of modeling and/or plotting artifacts that the user of the maps should bear in mind. An obvious one is that the wave properties are discontinuous where the various model domains overlap. A second is the quantization of the peak wave period in the nested SWAN models (see Tp plots in supplementary material). The least obvious artifact is that islands and headlands cast unrealistically sharp “shadows.” This is because the 50th percentile map shows, for example, what the wave properties would be on a day when the offshore wave height was equal to the median value and the direction and period equal to the corresponding values. The shadows would be more diffuse if we had run the many nested models for many actual years and then computed the statistics from the time histories of the nested models. Such an approach would be much more computer intensive, but the varying angles of incidence would allow time-averaged rather than “snapshot” estimates of the wave properties to be calculated.
Along-coast integral of the wave energy
 Integration of the flux propagating across the full length of the 25-m depth contour from 29° S in the West to 148° E was carried out on all wave energy flux maps (Table IV). Summer is the time of least wave energy, with the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentile integrated energy flux being 45, 101, and 228 GW in January. In July, these rise to 97, 210, and 468 GW. These figures indicate that the resource is fairly reliable: it is only for about 10% of the time (and here we should recall that the NWWIII archive comprises estimates of wave properties at intervals of 6 h) that the energy flux falls to less than half the median. Conversely, it is only for about 10% of the time that the energy flux exceeds twice the median value. Averaged over the whole year, Australia’s Southern coastline has a sustained wave energy resource of 146 GW (1329 TW h/yr).
In 2005–2006, Australia generated around 254 TW h/yr of electricity from an estimated total capacity of 50 GW. Presently, approximately 75% of electricity generation is from coal, with about 55% from black coal. The wave energy resource along Australia’s Southern margin (146 GW) is approximately three times Australia’s total installed capacity. If 10% of the incident wave energy could be converted to electricity, approximately one-half of Australia’s present-day electricity needs could be satisfied. Assessing the engineering feasibility, the cost or impact of converting this amount of wave energy to electricity is outside the scope of the present study. Our aim is simply to assess the extent of the energy resource and to characterize its variability. Our modeled wave energy estimates exceed buoy-derived estimates by a considerable margin (13%–53%) when waves are small and by a significant margin (2%–29%) at other times. This overestimation of wave energy is consistent with the 5%–10% overestimation of Hs observed at the deep-water sites where a comparison between model values (effectively at the boundaries at which NWW3 input data are specified) and satellite altimeter data has been carried out (Table III). We therefore attribute this error to the 5%–10% overestimation of Hs in the region by the NWW3 model. An alternative data set that could have been used to provide the offshore boundary conditions for the nested domain SWAN models in this study is the one analyzed by Hughes and Heap. We did not use it because the discrepancy from buoy observations is much greater. A problem common to many sources of renewable energy is the unpredictability of yield, raising concerns regarding their capacity to produce base-load electricity demand. Without storage, wind and solar energy systems are susceptible to the rapid temporal variability of their associated natural processes. The weather systems responsible for this variability have scales of ∼1000 km, so whole regions are impacted at once, not just individual farms. Five representative sites along the Southern Australian margin are chosen as potential sites for wave energy extraction, which are proximal to the existing Australian grid (Table V). Four of these sites would connect to the Australian National electricity Grid (NEM), while the fifth would connect to the West Australian grid only. We use time-series of EF computed directly from the NWW3 archives at each site. We sum the energy across the four NEM sites, and across all five sites, and compute percentile, i.e.,E1P=(Σx=1NEFx∗)P,where x represents site 1,…,N (where N=4 or 5) and P indicates percentile (10, 50, and 90). These values are compared with the sums of percentiles presented in this paper (from deep-water NWW3 values), i.e.,E2P=Σx=1N(EFP∗x).The comparison provides a measure of the spatial variability of the incident wave energy available to the national electricity grid. Summing over the NEM sites only during low wave conditions (10th percentile case), E110 is 8% larger than E210, indicating that during low wave conditions, distributing wave energy devices along the full extent of the NEM grid along the South coast provides only a minimal increase in energy available for the grid. If summed over all five sites (i.e., if the WA and NEM grids were connected), E110 is 26% larger than E210, indicating that when low wave conditions are experienced along the SA, Vic, and Tas coasts, a larger portion of wave energy could be input to the grid from the Western Australia sites. These results are consistent with those presented by Hemer et al.,16 which showed only a 4–5 h lag between wave events being observed off the South Australian coast and off the West coast of Tasmania, and indicate wave energy devices connected to the NEM will likely be coincidentally low. Energy storage systems would be required in order to provide a consistent power supply from wave energy alone. The Australian Government has set a 20% target for renewable energy by 2020, requiring an additional 45 000 GW h. While an economic analysis of wave generation in Australian waters is yet to be carried out, possibly with the development of this atlas, the massive availability of resource, particularly when considered within the context of other renewable resources, suggests that the 20% target is certainly achievable.
Our near-shore wave energy resource maps describe a resource that is approximately 30%–50% less than the World Energy Council estimates for the Southern Australian margin but 50% greater than the estimates of Hughes and Heap. Our model-derived wave energy estimates are approximately 20% greater than estimates from buoy data. We attribute this to a 5%–10% overestimation of significant wave height in the region by the NWW3 model. In the region of the Australian National Electricity Grid, the wave energy resource is essentially spatially uniform. When wave heights become low, they become so over the full stretch of the NEM, with only a short ( 12–24 h) delay across the whole Southern margin. Local storage or production offsetting rather than long distance transmission is therefore perhaps the more appropriate way of managing the variability. Unlike some forms of renewable energy, however, the range of the energy yield fluctuations is not extreme. The yield is half the median value, only 10% of the time. It is also probably fair to say, although we have not proven this in this study, that the time-scale of variation and/or the unpredictable component of that is somewhat longer for waves than it is for wind or solar. We attribute this to the simple fact that waves result from the action of winds averaged over a very large distance away from the diurnally varying heating and topographic effects of land. The data set presented in this study aims to provide a suitable data set for informing policy with details of the available wave energy in Australia’s priority near-shore regions for harnessing wave energy. The data will also further refine the most suitable locations for commercialization of wave energy converters, of interest to the wave energy industry. However, this user-group will require wave energy time-series data, providing, for example, details of threshold exceedances above and below which a device fails to operate (not available from this study) to enable a complete assessment of the suitability of the wave energy resource for site-specific locations for specific devices. A high spatial resolution wave transformation model as applied in this study, run with time-variable boundary and local wind conditions for a period of approximately 10 yr or more, should be regarded as the next step to adequately define the wave climate for wave energy resource assessments. The required model should be applied with a single domain, so that modeling artifacts observed in the present study are removed. Unstructured grids are now supported by SWAN (Ref. 28) and may prove suitable for future wave energy assessments for the extensive Southern Australian domain investigated here. To support the required modeling effort, we recommend greater investment in in situ observations along the Southern Australian margin in the form of directional waverider buoys (or similar). Presently, there is a dearth of directional observations in this region. Hemer and Bye29 identified offshore wave direction as the single most important parameter dictating attenuation of wave energy across the South Australian continental shelf. Proper verification of wave models in this region would therefore ensure that wave direction is suitably represented, which is not possible with the currently available observational data. The Australian Government seeks to produce 45 000 GW h/yr of additional renewable energy before 2020. The Southern margin of the Australian continent provides an abundant resource of wave energy, which can contribute to this target. Typical annual mean wave energy fluxes along the Southern margin are approximately 50 kW/m (432 GW h/yr/km). The total required renewable energy quota could be achieved if 10% of the available wave energy resource over a 1000 km section of the Southern Australian margin were converted to electricity.