Hydropower is the largest renewable energy resource in the United States and the world. However, hydropower dams have adverse ecological impacts because migrating fish may be injured or killed when they pass through hydroturbines. In the Columbia and Snake River basins, dam operators and engineers are required to make those hydroelectric facilities more fish-friendly through changes in hydroturbine design and operation after fish population declines and the subsequent listing of several species of Pacific salmon under the Endangered Species Act of 1973. Public Utility District No. 2 of Grant County, Washington, requested authorization from the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission to replace the ten turbines at Wanapum Dam with advanced hydropower turbines designed to improve survival for fish passing through the turbines while improving operation efficiency and increasing power generation. As an additional measure to the primary metric of direct injury and mortality rates of juvenile Chinook salmon using balloon tag-recapture methodology, this study used an autonomous sensor device—the Sensor Fish—to provide insight into the specific hydraulic conditions and physical stresses experienced by the fish as well as the specific causes of fish biological response. We found that the new hydroturbine blade shape and the corresponding reduction of turbulence in the advanced hydropower turbine were effective in meeting the objectives of improving fish survival while enhancing operational efficiency of the dam. The frequency of severe events based on Sensor Fish pressure and acceleration measurements showed trends similar to those of fish survival determined by the balloon tag-recapture methodology. In addition, the new turbine provided a better pressure and rate of pressure change environment for fish passage. Overall, the Sensor Fish data indicated that the advanced hydroturbine design improved passage of juvenile salmon at Wanapum Dam.
Hydropower is the world’s largest renewable energy resource, accounting for more than 75% of the global total renewable electric power capacity. In the United States, hydropower provides about 70% of the total renewable electric generation and 6% of the total electricity, with the Columbia and Snake River basins contributing to 50% of the nation’s total hydroelectric energy. However, hydropower dams may injure or kill fish that live in or migrate through impounded river systems. 3–5 Several species of anadromous Pacific salmon in the Columbia and Snake River basins are currently listed for protection under the Endangered Species Act of 1973. Consequently, dam operators and engineers are required to make these hydroelectric facilities more fish-friendly through changes in hydroturbine design and operation. In 2003, the Public Utility District No. 2 of Grant County, Washington (Grant PUD) requested authorization from the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) to replace the ten turbines at Wanapum Dam on the Columbia River in Washington State. The existing Kaplan-type turbines have been in place for more than 40 years and were reaching the end of their useful machine life. Grant PUD proposed to replace the turbines with an advanced hydropower turbine (AHT) design that would include features to improve survival for fish passing through the turbines while improving operation efficiency and increasing power generation from 895 to 1118 MW. Major changes in the AHT design to reduce adverse impacts to fish during turbine passage and improve hydraulic conditions included reshaped stay-vanes, improved alignment and reduced size of wicket gates, a runner with six blades (the existing one has five blades), a discharge ring to eliminate gaps at the hub and discharge ring, and reshaped draft tube to reduce turbulence. Major features of the AHT design for improving operation efficiency and increasing power generation included a larger turbine runner diameter, greater hydraulic capacity, and increased number of wicket gates (Fig. 3). One of these AHTs was installed at Wanapum Dam turbine Unit 8 for testing in 2005. The first step in biological performance testing for the new AHT was to compare fish passage and survival estimates and hydraulic conditions between the AHT and existing conventional turbine designs. Based on this information, a decision would be made on whether to proceed with replacement of the remaining nine turbines with the new AHTs. The U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, provided cofunding to Grant PUD for aspects of performance testing that supported the FERC application. The primary measure of biological performance for the application was direct injury and mortality rates of juvenile Chinook salmon as determined by balloon tag-recapture methodology. A randomized block experiment was conducted that included the two turbine types (conventional and AHT), three intake bays, two entrainment locations within each turbine, and four discharge levels . 11 Although balloon tag-recapture field studies are used routinely to evaluate turbine biological performance, they do not provide insight into the specific hydraulic conditions or physical stresses that the fish experience or the specific causes of the biological response. To overcome this limitation, an autonomous sensor device developed by Pacific Northwest National Laboratory was released concurrently with balloon tagged live fish to measure hydraulic conditions such as pressure, acceleration, and rotation acting on the sensor’s body in situ during downstream passage. The specific objectives of this study were (1) to develop and apply a methodology to classify Sensor Fish acceleration events and to analyze those events for general regions within the turbine system, (2) to statistically analyze Sensor Fish data together with live fish biological response data, and (3) to use Sensor Fish data to assess whether the AHT design features led to improved biological performance.
Wanapum Dam is within the Priest Rapids Project and is located in central Washington State on the Columbia River at river kilometer (rkm) 668 (Fig. 1). It consists of a 305-m, ten-turbine powerhouse, a 250-m, 12-bay spillway, and a nonoverflow earth-fill section. Columbia River average discharge at this location is approximately 3400 m3/s.
Sensor
 The Sensor Fish (Fig. 2) is an autonomous device developed at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory for the U.S. Department of Energy and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to better understand the physical conditions fish experience during passage through hydroturbines, spillways, and other dam bypass alternatives. It measures the three-dimensional linear acceleration and three-dimensional angular velocities, plus pressure and temperature, at a sampling frequency of 2000 Hz. The Sensor Fish device is 24.5 mm in diameter and 90 mm in length, weighs 42 g (comparable to a yearling salmon smolt), and is nearly neutrally buoyant in fresh water. Sensor Fish devices deployed for such studies are tested in a calibration apparatus prior to deployment. The relative errors of both the linear acceleration and angular velocity measurements are consistently less than 5%. The Sensor Fish has been used extensively in both laboratory environments 14 and hydroelectric dam field environments 15 to correlate with fish injury and provide information on severe hydraulic conditions.

 The existing turbine at Wanapum Dam Unit 9 was selected as the conventional turbine to compare with the new AHT at Unit 8. Passage conditions (treatments) consisted of combinations of factors including turbine discharge, the intake bay, and release depth (entrainment depth). In both turbines, Sensor Fish were injected at the centerline of each of three intake bays and at two elevations (152 and 146 m, termed shallow and deep releases, respectively) at the same horizontal locations (Fig. 3). The two release pipe elevations were 3 and 9 m lower than the turbine ceiling elevation (155 m). The consideration of elevation prior to turbine runner passage is critical because previous turbine biological assessments have found that the elevation of entry influences the turbine passage route. For Kaplan turbines, fish passing lower through the wicket gates will pass nearer the runner blade tips, while those passing higher through the wicket gates will pass nearer to the runner hub assuming fish follow the flow streamlines. Mortality rates for fish are significantly higher for fish that pass near the blade tips than for those that pass midblade and near the runner hub. All Sensor Fish releases were interspersed with the balloon tagged fish being evaluated in a separate study conducted by Normandeau Associates, Inc. Four discharge conditions (255, 311, 425, and 481 m3/s) were evaluated for each turbine, in addition to a maximum discharge condition of 524 m3/s for the AHT. A total of 891 Sensor Fish was released.

 Pressure measurements were used to estimate the depth and location of the Sensor Fish device. For both the conventional turbine and AHT, general distinctive features were associated with passage locations, including the time of passage from the injection pipe exit into the turbine intake, through the stay vane-wicket gate cascade, through the runner and runner wake, and through the draft tube (Fig. 4). When Sensor Fish contact solid structures or are impacted by turbulent shear, high-amplitude impulses occur in the acceleration and rotational velocity time history. If the acceleration reaches a certain threshold, the exposure is counted as an exposure event. Based on previous laboratory studies ,18 the event is further categorized into three levels according to the acceleration magnitude (|a|): (1) severe if |a|≥95g, (2) medium if 95g>|a|≥50g, and (3) slight if 50g>|a|≥25g. The identification of an event as collision or shear is based on the characteristics of acceleration during the exposure event. Peak duration was defined as the duration of acceleration within 70% of the peak value and used as the criterion to distinguish collision from shear: the exposure event is a collision event when peak duration is less than 0.0075 s, and the event is a shear event when peak duration is longer than 0.0075 s.13 Standard deviations of the probabilities of collisions or shear events were derived using the bootstrapping method. In addition to injury from collisions and shear, fish may be injured or killed by exposure to rapid changes in pressure during turbine passage. The magnitude and rate of change in pressure are greatest during passage from the wicket gates to exit of the runner. The lowest pressures (nadir pressure) are observed on the underside, or “suction” side, of turbine blades, while the highest are observed on the upper surface of the blades. Changes in the operating geometry of a turbine as well as the design of runner blades and other turbine elements also affect the magnitude and distribution of pressure in a turbine. To account for the complexity of the pressure environment, we computed the range and median of nadir total pressure for each treatment and rate of pressure change. The magnitude of pressure change was computed from the pressure measurements obtained by sensors as they were carried in flow from the wicket gates through the nadir around the turbine runner. The pressure rate of change was then estimated by dividing the pressure change measurement by the corresponding travel time.
Severe exposure events were primarily collisions. Of the 891 total releases, there were 185 severe collision events compared to 18 severe shear events. When all discharges and release elevations are combined, the number of severe events in the stay-vane/wicket gate and draft tube regions was effectively the same for both turbines (Fig. 5). The new AHT at Unit 8 had a lower probability of severe events in the runner region compared to those at the conventional turbine at Unit 9. However, due to small sample size, there were no clear trends when the data were examined by discharge and release elevation. In the intake region for both turbines, there were only very few slight events (six collisions and one shear); there were no severe or medium events. In the stay-vane/wicket gate region, the AHT had a slightly higher probability of severe collision (13.6%±1.5%) than the conventional turbine (10.7%±1.7%). Both turbines had very few severe shear events (0.4% and 0.8%, respectively), but the AHT had more slight shear events (14.2%±1.5%) than the conventional turbine (6.2%±1.3%). In the runner region, the conventional turbine had more severe collision events (9.6%±1.6%) and more severe shear events (3.9%±1.0%) than the AHT (4.9%±0.9% for severe collision and 0.7%±1.1% for shear). In the draft tube region, there were very few slight shear events (a total of four) and no severe or medium shear events for both units. In addition, the percentage of severe collisions was almost identical for the AHT (3.4%±0.8%) and the conventional turbine (3.4%±1.0%) in this region. When all four regions were pooled together (Fig. 6), the two turbines had almost identical probability of severe collisions at 20.5%±1.8% and 21.1%±2.2%, even though the AHT had a six-blade runner while the conventional turbine had a five-blade runner. In addition, the probabilities for both medium and slight collisions were similar for both turbines. The AHT had fewer severe shear events (1.1%±0.5%) than the conventional turbine (3.4%±1.2%), but the AHT had more slight shear events (29.3%±2.0%) than the conventional turbine (19.7%±2.5%) possibly due to the addition of more wicket gates to the AHT (i.e., 32 compared to 20 for the conventional turbine). There was no statistical evidence to suggest a significant difference in severe or medium events for these two turbines with all shear and collision combined. However, the AHT produced a slightly lower probability of severe events (21.3%±1.8%) than Unit 9 (23.7±2.2%). For both turbines, the Sensor Fish device released from the deep location (146 m elevation) experienced a significantly higher probability of a severe or medium event than those from shallow releases (Fig. 7). This finding is consistent with the results of the live fish study showing that fish from deep releases had significantly lower survival rates that those from shallow releases.17

 Recent research using simulated turbine passage pressure exposure indicates that factors such as nadir pressure, the depth acclimation history of fish and their state of buoyancy prior to turbine entry, significantly affect rates of injury and mortality. Median nadir total pressure and range measured by the Sensor Fish device decreased with discharge for both turbine units (Fig. 8). The new AHT showed higher nadir values and a narrower range than the conventional turbine. The difference in median nadir pressure was consistent at approximately 23 kPa for all discharges. However, the lowest nadir pressures observed for the new turbine were approximately 70 kPa higher than those for the existing design turbine at the highest discharges tested. The magnitude of pressure change from the turbine wicket gate through the runner exit was found to be consistently higher across discharge for both turbines for deep releases (Fig. 9). The new AHT had a smaller pressure change than the conventional turbine at the same release depth. However, the mean values for the shallow releases for the conventional turbine were lower or similar to those for the AHT deep releases. The highest rates of change were observed for the deep releases for the conventional turbine. The lowest pressure changes were observed for the shallow releases for the AHT. The average pressure rate of change steadily increased with discharge for both test turbines (Fig. 10). Trends similar to those observed for the magnitude of change in pressure were evident in the rate of change observations as well. The highest average rates of change were observed for the deep releases in the conventional turbine unit. The lowest rates of change were observed for the shallow releases in the new AHT.
Comparison of Sensor
 There were fewer severe events for shallow versus deep releases, which was reflected in fish survival rates (Table I). The overall rates of severe events for each turbine were similar, although the AHT had slightly fewer events than the conventional turbine. This trend was not reflected in the live fish survival rate, where the AHT had a slightly lower survival rate than the conventional turbine. However, the differences were not significant. The survival rates were only the direct effects of turbine passage from the turbine system. Fish were recovered immediately after they passed through the dam and held for 48 h. Fish injuries due to predation were excluded when estimating the injury rates due to the turbine environment. Indirect mortality that may occur at a later time as a result of passage through the hydrosystem was not considered either. Overall, the results could not reject the primary hypothesis that fish survival rate through the new AHT is equal or better than that through the original turbine.
Although the AHT at Unit 8 had a six-blade runner, it showed a reduced rate of severe collisions (4.9%±0.9%) compared to the five-blade runner of the conventional turbine at Unit 9 (9.6%±1.6%). Severe shear events were also fewer in the AHT. These results suggested that the new blade shape and the corresponding reduction turbulence in the AHT were effective in meeting the objectives of improving fish survival while enhancing operational efficiency and increasing power generation. The draft tube in the AHT was also modified to improve hydraulic conditions. However, Sensor Fish results did not show a significant difference in severe events between the two turbines that corresponded to passage through this region. The frequency of severe events, based on Sensor Fish pressure and acceleration measurements, showed similar trends to fish survival determined by balloon tag tests. This trend was consistent within each turbine unit and by entrainment depth. In addition, the new AHT turbine provided better pressure and rate of opressure change environment for fish passage. Overall, the Sensor Fish data indicated that the AHT design improved the passage of juvenile salmon at Wanapum Dam. The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission approved the relicensing application of Wanapum Dam by Grant PUD, and the remaining nine turbine units are being replaced with the AHT turbines and will be completed by 2012.