To shed light on the mechanism responsible for the weak ferromagnetism in undoped wide band gap oxides, we carry out a comparative study on ZnO thin films prepared using both sol-gel and molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) methods. Compared with the MBE samples, the sol-gel derived samples show much stronger room temperature ferromagnetism with a magnetic signal persisting up to ∼740 K, and this ferromagnetic order coexists with a high density of defects in the form of zinc vacancies. The donor-acceptor pairs associated with the zinc vacancies also cause a characteristic orange-red photoluminescence in the sol-gel films. Furthermore, the strong correlation between the ferromagnetism and the zinc vacancies is confirmed by our first-principles density functional theory calculations, and electronic band alteration as a result of defect engineering is proposed to play the critical role in stabilizing the long-range ferromagnetism.
The prospect of incorporating magnetic properties into wide band gap oxides has attracted much attention as a promising route to develop diluted magnetic oxides (DMO). There have been intensive research efforts focused on wide band gap oxides ,7 among which doped ZnO is considered as a prominent candidate and has attracted tremendous research interest over the past decade. This intense interest on ZnO is also fueled by the fact that ZnO promises many applications in optoelectronic and transparent electronics as it boasts a wide band gap (3.37 eV) and a large exciton binding energy (60 meV) at room temperature. The initial attention was drawn on ZnO by the theoretical prediction that p-type ZnO doped with Mn would show room temperature ferromagnetism (RTFM). This report has been followed by numerous experiments on RTFM in ZnO doped with a wide range transition metals such as Mn, Co, Fe, Cr, and Cu. However, progress has been hampered by large disparities in experimental results and interpretations ,9 and controversies also originate from the fact that the observed ferromagnetism is usually so weak that it is hard to distinguish it from the extrinsic sources or artefacts.9, 15–17 It has been well recognized that the major obstacle in studying the magnetism in dilute doped oxides is related to extrinsic tendency of metal clustering as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). Although the transition metal ions with open d shells are intended to dope homogeneously into the oxide host, the strong cohesive force between the neighboring impurities leads to their aggregation instead of the desired random distribution. This is particularly true if the samples are grown in a reducing environment or annealed in vacuum. These nanoscale metal clusters may contribute to the overall magnetism, but the cluster/oxide composites do not qualify as genuine diluted magnetic semiconductors. Recently, there has been accumulating evidences suggesting that defects play important roles in establishing the magnetic order in wide band gap oxides. In particular, RTFM has been reported in undoped ZnO, which to a certain degree helps to settle the controversies delineated above due to the absence of any intentionally doped metallic element. This emergent ferromagnetism in undoped oxides is often called ‘d0 ferromagnetism’,20 where defects are believed to be responsible in initiating hybridization at the Fermi level and establishing a long-range ferromagnetism. It may not be very surprising as the defects have been recognized for a long time to play important roles in dictating the electrical and optical properties of most wide band gap oxide semiconductors. As we illustrated in Fig. 1(b), this approach forms a strong contrast with doping transition metals by avoiding the occurrence of unintentional clustering. Indeed, experimental observations of ferromagnetism in ZnO thin films 23 and pure ZnO powders 24,25 have been attributed to the intrinsic defects. It was also proposed that defects like Zn and O vacancies,23, 26–31 Zn interstitial ,32 grain boundaries 33 and lattice distortion 34 can induce ferromagnetism. RTFM has been observed in a wide range of undoped oxides such as TiO2, HfO2, In2O3, SnO2, CeO2, Cu2O and MgO, 35–41 suggesting that the underlying physics is universal. However, open questions still remain related to this approach of defect engineering towards magnetism in oxides: e.g., what kinds of defects can contribute magnetic moments? How to establish the long-range magnetic coupling of local moments in an oxide host? Thus, it is of paramount importance to investigate the roles of intrinsic defects in the onset of ferromagnetism because of their abundance in wide band gap oxides. 42–44 On the other hand, we should note that although there is no immediate danger of metal clustering in undoped oxides, extreme cares should still be taken to exclude the contribution of magnetic contaminations, which clearly entails deliberate experimental designs. Furthermore, although native defects have been recognized as important players influencing the electrical and optical properties of ZnO, it is a formidable task to quantitatively determine their concentrations as well as their exact contributions to the physical properties. One approach is to adjust the growth environment with the hope that the tuned chemical potentials of Zn and O may lead to the preferred formation of different defects. This can also be accomplished via post-synthesis treatments such as annealing in different gas atmospheres. Another complimentary approach is to compare the experimental results with the first-principles calculations which often can provide useful insights regarding to the defect formation energies, their positions in the band gap, and even the possible magnetic orders. In this work, we carried out a systematic study on the effect of defects, in particular zinc vacancy (VZn), on the ferromagnetism in undoped ZnO by comparing the results of two distinct growth methods, i.e., sol-gel (SG) and MBE. By carefully selecting the precursor and deliberately maintaining an oxygen rich growth environment, we can reproducibly create a high density of VZn defects in the SG films while suppressing the formation of other types of defects. These high-density VZn are accompanied by a characteristic defect-related light emission in the photoluminescence spectra. Importantly, a clear signal of RTFM was observed in the Zn-deficient SG samples, which is absent in the near-stoichiometric MBE ZnO thin films. These complimentary optical and magnetic data suggest a clear correlation between the ferromagnetism and the zinc vacancies. Moreover, ab initio calculations were carried out to confirm that VZn in wurtzite ZnO can indeed induce magnetic moments at the Fermi level, and the spin-dependent band alteration as a result of this defect engineering is the origin of the observed ferromagnetism in undoped ZnO.
To implement a comparative study, we used two distinct routes to synthesize undoped ZnO thin films. It is well known that the structure and property of thin films strongly depend on the synthesis routes, and the synthesis can be tuned effectively to engineer the type and density of defects. In particular, oxide thin films grown by chemical-solution-based methods like the sol-gel growth are often characterized by an oxygen-rich composition and contain a large amount of point defects like VZn. As the first type of samples, sol-gel ZnO thin films were coated on Si substrates followed by annealing. In a typical experiment, commercialized Si substrates were first cleaned ultrasonically in ethanol and then treated by plasma to render a hydrophilic surface. Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O was dissolved in a mixture of solvent 2-methoxyethanol and stabilizer 2-aminoethanol. After thoroughly stirring the solution at RT for 1 h, a homogeneous and transparent solution was obtained. The precursor films were formed by spin coating the starting solution on the substrates at 3000 rpm for 30 s. After the spin coating, the precursor films were heated at 500 oC for 10 min in order to remove the volatile species and then crystallized at 650 oC in oxygen ambient for 1 h. This process was repeated several times to achieve a desired film thickness of ∼400 nm. The second type of ZnO films samples is high-quality ∼400 nm thick epilayers grown on c-plane sapphire substrates using a V80H MBE system equipped with Knudsen-cells of Zn solid source (99.9999% purity) and a rf-plasma oxygen source. In order to obtain clean surfaces, the substrates were chemically etched in a hot solution of H2SO4:H3PO4 = 3:1 at 150 oC for 15 min. The MBE growth took place at a substrate temperature of 550 oC. A two-dimensional growth mode was sustained throughout the growth process as evidenced by the streaky reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) patterns. In terms of structure and stoichiometry, the MBE samples show different characteristics from the SG ones, which allows us to carry out a comparative study and determine the role of defects in the onset of ferromagnetism. We performed comprehensive and systematic analysis on the structural and physical properties of the samples. The crystalline structure of the samples was characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) with Cu Kα radiation (λ=0.15418 nm). Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images were taken on a scanning probe microscope (Veeco Digital Instruments) with Si probe tips. A quantitative compositional analysis was carried out using an X-ray energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS), and time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS IV instrument from IONTOF Gmbh) was employed to yield elemental depth profiles. Photoluminescence (PL) measurements in the temperature range of 80∼310 K were carried out under the excitation of a He-Cd laser with a wavelength of 325 nm and a power of 0.1 mW. Magnetization measurements were carried out in a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometer (Quantum Design, MPMSXL-5). Transport measurements were performed on the samples with the van der Pauw configuration in a Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS). Throughout the synthesis and measurements, only plastic tweezers were used to avoid any contamination from metal tools.
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF UNDOPED ZNO FILMS:


 The XRD patterns shown in Figs. 2(a) and 2(b) suggest that both MBE and SG samples grown on Si and sapphire substrates are single-phase wurtzite ZnO with a (001) orientation. Indeed, highly textured ZnO thin films have been previously achieved via soft chemistry routes by fine tuning the hydrolysis-condensation of Zn-ethanolamine complexes . 49 Insets of Figs. 2(a) and 2(b) illustrate the corresponding AFM images of MBE and SG samples, whose root mean square (RMS) roughness are 2 and 9 nm, respectively. Figure 2(c) depicts the EDS spectrum of as-grown SG ZnO film, and after systematic calibration the detected Zn/O atomic ratio is ∼0.887, which indicates the existence of Zn deficiency. This Zn deficiency can be reduced by annealing in an Ar gas flowing environment; In a particular run, the Zn/O atomic ratio increases to ∼0.942 after the as-grown SG sample was annealed at 700 oC for 40 min. In comparison, the MBE film shows a much higher Zn/O ratio of ∼1.083, suggesting a certain degree of oxygen deficiency. These various compositions are illustrated in the inset of Fig. 2(c). We should note here that extensive EDS scans in all samples showed no other impurity above the detection limit. We also carried out multiple experiments to calibrate the sample compositions during a period of three months after synthesis and found that the chemical compositions of these thin films are quite stable. Considering that SIMS is a powerful technique with high detection resolutions to probe the element distribution, we performed ToF-SIMS measurements on our samples using 3 keV Ar+ as primary ions. Figure 2(d) gives the SIMS depth profiles of Zn and O elements in the SG and the MBE ZnO films, suggesting uniform distribution in both types of samples. Furthremore, the impurity signals (including magnetic elements such as Cr, Mn, Fe, Ni, and Co) are within the measurement noise. Although the yields in defferent samples vary, the calibrated Zn/O ratio of the as-grown SG film is obviously smaller than that of the MBE sample, which is in agreement with the EDS results. In the following, we will discuss how these composition variations affect the magnetic properties of the samples, and then link it with the characteristics of defects.

 We carried out the magnetic measurements on these SG and MBE thin film samples using a SQUID magnetometer with the magnetic field applied parallel to the film plane. Figure 3(a) shows the raw data of magnetization versus applied magnetic-field (M-H) without subtracting the substrate contribution measured at 5 and 300 K. In order to exclude the effect of any potential contamination of the substrates that may contribute to the observed magnetism, we measured the bare silicon and sapphire substrates following the same procedures and determined their diamagnetic contributions. The SQUID data after subtracting the substrate diamagnetic contributions are shown in Fig. 3(b). The immediate observation is that the ferromagnetic signal from the SG sample is much stronger than that of the MBE sample. For the as-grown SG sample, the coercive field and the saturation magnetization (MS) at 300 K are 60 Oe and 0.028 μB/u.c. (i.e., μB/unit cell), respectively. Several measurements spanning more than two months confirm the reproducibility of data [Figs. 3(a) and 3(b)]. The MS of the SG sample is about four times stronger than the value previously reported in laser-ablated undoped ZnO thin films with the comparable thickness . 30 In contrast, the MBE sample shows a much weaker magnetic signal, with its MS about fifty times smaller than that of the SG sample. Since both samples were handled in the same way, we can conclude that the much enhanced magnetism in the SG sample cannot come from any post-synthesis contamination. A further proof came from a control experiment where we broke the SG sample into a few pieces and then measured their individual magnetic signals. If the magnetism originates from contaminations like contacting with metal tweezers, then the distribution should be inhomogeneous . 16 As shown in Fig. 3(b), the magnetism in unit of emu/u.c. remain the same after the breakage of sample, which indicates negligible contamination. These compositional and magnetic data delineated above suggest a clear correlation between the ferromagnetism and the Zn deficiency: the magnetism in the SG sample with a higher Zn deficiency is much stronger than that in the MBE sample. If this scenario is correct, then the Ar annealed SG sample with less Zn deficiency should exhibit a weaker magnetism. Indeed, as shown in Fig. 3(b), MS of the annealed SG sample decreases to almost one eighth of the original value. This gives further supports to our hypothesis that Zn deficiency boosts ferromagnetism in undoped ZnO thin films. We should also note here that the weak magnetism of the MBE sample may come from some unintentional incorporation of impurities which is very difficult or even impossible to exclude during synthesis. The temperature-dependent magnetization in the samples was further measured under an applied magnetic field of 1000 Oe in both the zero-field-cooled (ZFC) and the field-cooled (FC) modes. The data shown in Fig. 3(c) suggest again that the magnetization of the SG sample is much stronger than that of the MBE sample in the whole temperature range. Using an oven attached to the SQUID magnetometer, we measured the magnetization of the SG sample up to 780 K under the field–cooled mode. As depicted in the normalized M(T)/M(5 K) data in Fig. 3(d), the magnetization starts to decrease as T increases above 380 K, and after another sharp drop at 525 K the magnetization vanishes almost completely at about 740 K, which could be taken as the transition temperature TC. Such high temperature magnetic measurements have been seldom reported for wide band gap oxides;50,51 to the best of our knowledge, the data reported here are the first for undoped ZnO. Clearly, the mechanism underlying this high temperature ferromagnetism and the temperature-dependent behaviors warrant further investigations.
Electrical and magnetotransport
 The temperature-dependent resistivity data in Fig. 4(a) suggest a semiconducting behavior for both the SG and the MBE ZnO thin films. The higher resistivity in the SG sample suggests a lower density of state at the Fermi level and/or a stronger localization. We examined various conduction mechanisms and found that our transport data in the low temperature regime reconcile with the three dimensional Mott variable-range-hopping (VRH) mechanism as shown in the inset of Fig. 4(a) which plots lnρ vs. T-1/4.52 Such transport characteristics of undoped ZnO is consistent with the previous reports . 53,54 At higher temperatures the thermally activated band conduction appears to be the dominant mechanism. Magnetotransport measurements, such as magnetoresistance (MR) and anomalous Hall effect (AHE), have been rarely reported for undoped ZnO. Figure 4(b) shows the MR data taken on the SG and the MBE ZnO films. A negative MR was observed in both samples, and it reaches 4.8% (SG) and 1.8% (MBE) at 50 K under 60 kOe. These data can be explained by taking into account the third-order expansion of the s-d exchange Hamiltonian, which gives a semiempirical expression ,56 \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}\begin{document}\begin{equation} \Delta \rho /\rho _0 = - a^2 \ln (1 + b^2 H^2)\end{equation}\end{document}Δρ/ρ0=−a2ln(1+b2H2)
where a2 = A1JρF[S(S + 1) + <M2 > ], $ b^2 = [1+4S^2 \pi ^2(\frac{2J \rho _F}{g})^4] \frac{g^2 \mu ^2}{(\alpha kT)^2}$b2=[1+4S2π2(2JρFg)4]g2μ2(αkT)2. Here J is the exchange integral, ρF is the density of states at the Fermi level, <M> is the average magnetization, S is the spin of the localized magnetic moments, and α is a numerical constant. Fitting parameters obtained from the 50 K MR data are $a_{SG}^2 = 1.23001, \, b_{SG}^2 = 1.50525;$aSG2=1.23001,bSG2=1.50525; $a_{MBE}^2 = 0.61351, \, b_{MBE}^2 = 0.44516.$aMBE2=0.61351,bMBE2=0.44516. If we assume that other parameters for SG and MBE ZnO samples are similar and consider that ρF is low in the SG sample, the larger fitting parameter $b_{SG}^2 $bSG2 in the SG sample indicates a stronger exchange coupling J between the mobile carriers and localized magnetic moments. Also, a smaller $a_{MBE}^2 $aMBE2 is qualitatively consistent with the much smaller magnetization <M> observed in the MBE sample. AHE is often conceived as a proof of intrinsic ferromagnetism although it could also originate from metal clusters . 57 To form metal clusters, the magnetic impurity concentration must be high enough to either reach the bulk percolation threshold or lead to the formation of large clusters with a size of ∼10 nm near the interface 57,58 Apparently, those scenarios are highly unlikely in our undoped samples since they were synthesized by using high purity (99.9999%) precursor materials with negligible metal contamination. The anomalous part of ρxy should be proportional to the magnetization in the regime of low magnetic field, whereas the ordinary Hall effect dominates in the high field regime. After subtraction of the ordinary Hall effect (the linear high-field component), a clear AHE was observed in the SG ZnO film as shown in Fig. 4(c). This is consistent with the larger exchange coupling in the SG ZnO obtained from the MR results. The small magnitude of the AHE signal in our sample is typical for magnetic oxides ,60 which can be attributed to the high resistivity and the low concentration of mobile carriers . 61 In comparison, ρxy of the nonmagnetic MBE sample shows only the ordinary Hall effect, which is consistent with its very weak magnetism.

 In ZnO, without any intentional doping, intrinsic or native defects play important roles in determining the physical properties. However, the characteristics of various defects, like their concentrations and locations in the band gap, remain as controversial issues. Recently, most of the experimental and theoretical studies have reached a consensus that oxygen vacancies and zinc vacancies are the defects with the lowest formation energies . 60 Here we used PL measurements to investigate the defect-related emissions in SG and MBE ZnO samples, aiming to reveal the nature of the defects. In Fig. 5(a), the temperature-dependent PL spectra of the SG sample are characterized by a near-band-edge (NBE) UV peak along with a broad orange-red emission band. The weak green emission at the shoulder of the orange-red band is usually attributed to oxygen vacancies (VO),8,62 and the associated donors-bound excitons also give rise to the characteristic emission in the NBE region. The orange-red luminescence in ZnO containing no foreign impurities can be considered to be intrinsic and attributed to Zn deficiency. As in previous reports ,45,63,64 we ascribe this Zn deficiency to VZn defects, which will be confirmed later by the temperature-dependent PL studies and the first-principles calculations. The origin of the orange-red luminescence is likely related to the intraband transitions involving VO and VZn defect complexes, i.e., donor-acceptor-pair (DAP) emission. Furthermore, this orange-red emission band shows fine-structured peaks equally separated by the longitudinal optical phonon energy of ∼72 meV, which has been rarely reported in literature for undoped ZnO, and might be attributed to the strong electron-phonon coupling associated with the deep VO levels . 65 As shown in Fig. 5(b), in the MBE sample, on the other hand, the orange-red emission is negligible, instead a weak green emission was observed, which suggest different types of radiative defects. The abundance of the VZn defects in the as-grown SG thin films is related to the particular oxygen-rich growth environment where the reconstruction of the cation and anion ions occurs. This solution-based growth route is very different from the often employed physical vapor deposition methods like MBE, sputtering, and pulsed laser deposition, leading to the formation of distinct defect species . 45 In the SG synthesis, incomplete pyrolysis and oxygen-saturated chemical bond often produce oxygen-rich (zinc-poor) films . 45 Indeed, the synthesis-composition correspondence is quite robust: about twenty ZnO thin films prepared in the SG route consistently exhibit a clear Zn deficiency, and their PL spectra always show the characteristic orange-red emission. As shown in Fig. 6(a), fine structures were clearly resolved in the NBE emission spectra measured at 80 K, and the peaks can be identified as the free excitons (FE), bound excitons, and their corresponding replicas . 8,9 In details, the peaks at 3.362 and 3.329 eV can be assigned to the emission of donor-bound excitons (D0X) and acceptor-bound excitons (A0X), respectively. Longitudinal-optical-photon replicas of the acceptor-bound excitons (A0X-LO) and the free excitons (FE-LO) can also be identified lying ∼72 meV away from the main peaks . 8,9 As expected, the A0X NBE emission in the SG sample is much stronger than that in the MBE sample due to the presence of VZn as acceptors. Figure 6(b) shows the temperature-dependent PL spectra of the SG ZnO sample in the UV region, illustrating the evolution of the dominant bound-exciton emissions measured from 310 to 80 K. Figure 6(c) depicts the Arrhenius plot of the A0X integrated intensity I as a function of 1000/T. The solid line is the least square fit of the data according to the relationship: $I\left( T \right) = I_0 /( {1 + Ae^{\left( { - E_b /K_B T} \right)} } )$IT=I0/(1+Ae−Eb/KBT), where the activation energy Eb was calculated to be ∼60 meV. According to the Haynes's rule ,66 Eb should correspond to 10% of the energy difference between the acceptor (VZn) level and the valence band maximum (VBM). Therefore, as depicted in the inset of Fig. 6(c), it is expected that the radiative transition, i.e., the VZn-related DAP emission from the VO level (∼2.5 eV from the VBM)8,59 to the VZn level (∼0.6 eV from the VBM) should give an emission at ∼1.9 eV. Indeed, this is consistent with our observation of the orange-red emission, which is also in line with the reported values of 1. 8–2.1 eV in Zn-deficient ZnO samples. 8–10, 69–72 Since the SG ZnO thin film sample has both VO and VZn as the main defect species, then a critical question arises: which defect contributes to the observed ferromagnetism? As we will show later, VZn has much lower formation energy than VO in the oxygen-rich growth environment typical for the sol-gel synthesis, which implies a dominantly high density of VZn in the SG sample. On the other hand, the near-stoichiometric MBE film containing VO shows a much weaker magnetism. Furthermore, there are two additional reasons leading us to believe that VZn plays the critical role in establishing the ferromagnetic order: one is that the magnetism was weakened after Ar annealing which is believed to heal the VZn defects in the as-grown samples . 61 The other evidence comes from the recent reports where cation vacancies was suggested to be responsible in establishing the ferromagnetism in wide band gap oxides ,5,31,40,73 Additionally, many recent theoretical calculations suggest that the s electrons contributed by VO cannot establish ferromagnetism. These considerations guided us to focus on the role of VZn in the first-principles calculations which will be detailed in the next section.
FIRST PRINCIPLE CALCULATIONS TO SUPPORT THE CORRELATION BETWEEN FERROMAGNETISM AND ZN 


 To shed light on the defect-induced magnetism in undoped ZnO, we performed the first-principles calculations within the framework of density functional theory as implemented in the VASP code. The projector augmented wave (PAW) potentials 75 were used for electron-ion interactions while exchange-correlation effects were treated within the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhoff form 76 of the generalized gradient approximation (GGA). Spin-polarized self-consistent calculations were performed using a plane-wave basis set limited by a cutoff energy of 400 eV. Defect calculations were performed using a 3×3×2 supercells and a 3×3×2 Monkhorst-Pack k-point mesh 77 which ensure an energy convergence of 10-4 eV/cell. Atomic relaxations were performed until the Hellmann-Feynman forces on atoms are less than 0.02 eV/Å. The optical properties of ZnO are obtained using hybrid density functional and CRYSTAL code ,78 which gives the correct ZnO band gap. The internal configurations of the atoms were relaxed before any addition of defects to ensure that the bulk ZnO is in equilibrium state.
Magnetic moments and ferromagnetic order in ZnO with V
 Using a supercell containing 72 atoms (Zn36O36− wurtzite structure), we considered several possible native point defects relevant to our experiments, namely zinc interstitial (Zni), VZn, VO, oxygen interstitial (Oi) and Zni-VO complex. The formation energy of an intrinsic defect in ZnO is calculated from \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}\begin{document}\begin{equation} E_f = E_{tot}^D - E_{tot}^{\rm 0} \pm \sum {n_i } \mu _i \end{equation}\end{document}Ef=EtotD−Etot0±∑niμi
where $E_{tot}^D$EtotD is the total energy of the supercell containing the intrinsic defect, $E_{tot}^0$Etot0 is the total energy of the host supercell without the defects. ni is the number of atoms removed from the host supercell to create a vacancy (+) or added to the host supercell to create an interstitial (−), and μi is the chemical potential of the corresponding atom. For simplicity, we have kept the valence of the defects constant in the calculations. The calculated defect formation energies as functions of the oxygen chemical potential are depicted in Fig. 7. In the oxygen-rich environment like in the sol-gel synthesis, VZn and Oi possess the lowest formation energies of 1.52 and 2.31 eV, respectively. This also implies that these two defects have the highest densities in the SG sample because the concentration of a native defect in a solid is determined by its formation energyEf through the relation 80 \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}\begin{document}\begin{equation} c = N \, exp \left( {\frac{{ - E_f }}{{k_B T}}} \right) \end{equation}\end{document}c=Nexp−EfkBT
where N is the number of possible sites the defects may occupy, kB is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature. Thus, we focus on VZn and Oi in the following discussions. In Fig. 8(a), one VZn was modeled by taking out a neutral Zn atom (colored with light grey) in the Zn36O36 supercell, which corresponds to a defect concentration of ∼1.38%. As the nominal valence of Zn in ZnO is 2+, two holes are generated to compensate a Zn vacancy. The atomic structures of all the systems were relaxed before the properties of the crystals are examined, and it was found that VZn shows a magnetic moment of 1.8 μB. Electronic structure calculations were performed on these systems to determine their spin polarizations in the crystal. We calculated the density of states (DOS) of ZnO with VZn and Oi using Hybrid functional with the correct energy gap of ZnO. The defect level of VZn is about 0.6 eV above the VBM [Fig. 8(b)], which is in agreement with the VZn level in the gap as determined from our experimental PL spectra. Even though oxygen interstitial also shows a finite magnetic moment, it is ruled out as the origin of the observed ferromagnetism since there is no experimental spectral evidence for transition involving defect levels of O interstitial [Fig. 8(c)]. The FM state is expected to be stable at room temperature since its energy is 26 meV lower than that of the AFM state, which is in agreement with the experimentally observed RTFM. The calculated spin density for two VZn in the supercell is shown in Fig. 9. The strong p-p interaction between the unpaired 2p electrons at O sites surrounding the VZn appears to be the source for the observed ferromagnetism in the SG ZnO sample. Indeed, although oxygen vacancies were originally proposed as the source of magnetism in undoped oxides like HfO2,81 density functional calculations later found no evidence for magnetic moments around oxygen vacancies ,82 instead partially depleted oxygen orbitals around cation vacancies were found effective to give rise to large magnetic moments . 83 Regarding to the distribution of VZn in undoped ZnO, both theoretical 27 and experimental 84 studies suggest that VZn localized on the surfaces contribute more to the extended magnetism, which warrants further studies.
In summary, we have carried out a comparative study of the magnetic and optical properties of undoped sol-gel and MBE ZnO thin films, aiming to revealing the roles of various defects in stabilizing the ferromagnetic order. A clear signal of RTFM was observed in the as-grown Zn-deficient sol-gel ZnO thin films, which became much weaker after annealing; on the other hand, the MBE film showed negligible magnetism. The sol-gel film also exhibited large negative MR and clear AHE. The systematic photoluminescence measurements and first-principles calculations revealed the close link between the observed RTFM in the sol-gel film and the high density of defects in the form of VZn. Besides confirming the position of the VZn level in the band gap, our calculations also indicated that the magnetic moments arise from the unpaired 2p electrons at the O sites surrounding the VZn defects. Overall, our results suggest that defect engineering via producing FM-correlated spin-polarized defects is a viable route to realizing the potentials of ZnO-based materials in spintronic devices for future applications.