Mixing 60-70% lead zirconate titanate with 40-30% lead iron tantalate produces a single-phase, low-loss, room-temperature multiferroic with magnetoelectric coupling: (PbZr0.53Ti0.47O3) (1-x)- (PbFe0.5Ta0.5O3)x. The present study combines x-ray scattering, magnetic and polarization hysteresis in both phases, plus a second-order dielectric divergence (to epsilon = 6000 at 475 K for 0.4 PFT; to 4000 at 520 K for 0.3 PFT) for an unambiguous assignment as a C2v-C4v (Pmm2-P4mm) transition. The material exhibits square saturated magnetic hysteresis loops with 0.1 emu/g at 295 K and saturation polarization Pr = 25 μC/cm2, which actually increases (to 40 μC/cm2) in the high-T tetragonal phase, representing an exciting new room temperature oxide multiferroic to compete with BiFeO3. Additional transitions at high temperatures (cubic at T>1300 K) and low temperatures (rhombohedral or monoclinic at T<250 K) are found. These are the lowest-loss room-temperature multiferroics known, which is a great advantage for magnetoelectric devices.
It is well known that Pb(Fe0.5Ta0.5)O3 (PFT) is a typical Pb complex perovskite with general formula Pb(B′B″)O3, where magnetic (3d5) Fe3+ and nonmagnetic (3d0) Ta5+ ions in octahedral B′ and B″ positions are randomly distributed. PFT belongs to the class of single-phase multiferroic materials. Rietveld refinement of the neutron powder diffraction data reported on PFT shows that it possess an ideal cubic Pm$\bar 3$3¯m structure (T > 270 K), a tetragonal (P4mm) intermediate phase (220 K < T < 270 K) and a low temperature monoclinic (Cm) structure (T < 220 K). PFT undergoes two successive diffuse ferroelectric phase transitions that take place at about 270 K and 220 K,2 and in addition two antiferromagnetic transitions, one of which is reported in the range 133 - 180 K3 and the other at 9 K. On the other hand, the commercial ferroelectric Pb(Zr1-x,Tix)O3 (PZT) (0<x<1) has been the mainstay for high performance actuators and transducers and nonvolatile ferroelectric memories, owing to its superior dielectric and piezoelectric properties. PZT with composition (Zr/Ti:0.53/0.47), exhibits a morphotropic phase boundary (MPB) which divides the phase diagram of PZT mainly in two regions: The Zr-rich rhombohedral region (space groups R3m and R3c) and Ti-rich tetragonal region, (space group P4mm), plus a small monoclinic phase near the boundary. In this region PZT exhibits extraordinarily high piezoelectric, pyroelectric, dielectric, and ferroelectric response, with a ferroelectric (tetragonal)-paraelectric (cubic) phase transition at ∼660 K. Perovskite solid solutions have been an active area of research due to possibility of exploring new materials with multifunctional applications;9 one possibility is synthesis of a solid solution of ferroelectric (FE) and ferromagnetic (FM) perovskite-type structure in one single-phase material, which may yield novel multiferroic behavior with “product” properties such as magnetoelectric (ME) effect, with potential for ME nonvolatile memory based on magnetic read and electric write techniques, and also as low-field magnetic field sensors. BiFeO3 (BFO) is a well known and extensively investigated room temperature single-phase multiferroic due to its high polarization, nonzero magnetization, and weak magnetoelectric coupling . 10 One of the major drawbacks of BFO is high leakage current, which makes it difficult to integrate for nonvolatile memory/device elements. Pb(B′B″)O3 family of materials is completely unlike BiFeO3 in that the ferroelectricity is caused by displacement of the magnetic ions (Fe) at the B-site. That is of interest to theoreticians. Since the choice of single-phase materials exhibiting coexistence of FE and FM is limited, several multiferroic composites which are comprised of a mixture of BiFeO3 and Pb-based perovskite materials with separate or combined FE and FM has been reported, such as 0.45(Bi1-xLax)FeO3-0.55PbTiO3,12 [(BiFeO3)x(BiMg0.5Ti0.5O3)1-x]0.55[PbTiO3]0.45,13 and Pb(Fe2/3W1/3)O3(PFW)-BiFeO3.14 Useful attempts at synthesizing Pb-based solid solution of perovskite-type structure by several scientific groups to get novel room temperature multiferroics have been reported. Further research efforts were directed at multiferroics based on solid solutions of ferroelectric and relaxor magnetoelectric-multiferroics (with Fe3+ at the B-site). Pb-based perovskites of general formula Pb(B′B″)O3 are of special interest. Studies of dielectric, ferroelectric and ferromagnetic properties of several Pb-based solid solutions have also been reported: 0.8Pb(Fe0.33W0.67)O3-0.2PbTiO3,15 (1-x)Pb(Fe0.5Nb0.5)O3(PFN)-xPb(Zr0.2Ti0.8)O3,16 and Pb(Fe0.5Nb0.5)O3-Pb(Zn1/3Nb2/3)O3,17 which open the possibility of obtaining single-phase multiferroic material as solid solutions of ferroelectric and relaxor perovskite systems. Because of the intense interest in these composite multiferroic materials, investigation on dielectric and structural data associated with ferroelectric phase transitions is very important for materials with potential electronic applications. Several groups have studied the structural phase transition of solid solution perovskites; for example Singh et al. reported the dielectric relaxation and phase transition at cryogenic temperatures in 0.65[Pb(Ni1/3Nb2/3)O3]-0.35PbTiO3 multiferroic ceramics . 18 Recently our group also showed a novel magnetic control of large polarization for the PZT1-x-PFWx (0<x<1) system. A large number of ME multiferroics can be artificially designed with tuning of different percentages of cations at A and B sites. In this particular system ME coupling arises due to the nonlinear fourth order parameters i.e. P2M2. 19–22 A detailed literature survey shows that so far no one studied the structural phase transition of (PbZr0.53Ti0.47 O3) (1-x)- (PbFe0.5Ta0.5O3)x (PZTFT) multiferroic ceramics. We report here the temperature dependent x-ray scattering, Raman, dielectric, magnetization and polarization studies of PZTFT multiferroic ceramics. These results show the PZTFT ceramic pass through a tetragonal to orthorhombic phase transition during cooling. X-ray scattering analysis revealed two possible orthorhombic symmetries at room temperature, giving P222 (D2) or Pmm2 (C2v), and two possible tetragonal phases at elevated temperatures: P4/m (C4h) or P4mm (C4v). However, square polarization hysteresis in both phases plus a second-order dielectric divergence (to epsilon = 6000 at 460 K for 0.4 PFT; to 4000 at 530 K for 0.3 PFT) require an unambiguous assignment as a C2v-C4v (Pmm2-P4mm) transition. In addition, we find evidence from Raman scattering that this system becomes cubic (Pm$\bar 3$3¯m) above ca. 1300 K (but below its melting point), and from dielectric loss measurements that its symmetry becomes lower than orthorhombic slightly below room temperature at ca. 250 K. Thus the probable full sequence of phase transitions for the 40% PFT is: cubic Pm$\bar 3$3¯m above 1300 K; tetragonal P4/mm at 460 K < T < 1300 K; orthorhombic Pmm2 at 250 K < T <460 K; and rhombohedral or monoclinic (unknown space group) at T < 250 K.
Ceramic samples of PZTFT were prepared by conventional solid state reaction route. Analytical-purity oxides, PbO (99.5%), ZrO2 (99.86%), TiO2 (99.96%), Fe2O3 (99.99%) and Ta2O5 (97%) (Alfa Aesar) were used as raw materials. The powder of the respective metal oxides were mixed in planetary high energy ball mill with tungsten carbide media at a ball-to-powder weigh ratio of 1:3, at a speed of 600 rpm for a period of 16 h, and then it was calcined at 850 °C for 10 h in a closed alumina crucible. 10 % excess of PbO was added to each composition to compensate Pb deficiency during the high temperature processing. Poly (vinyl alcohol) solutions (1%) were added to the calcined powders as a binder. The dried powders were granulated by passing them through a 150μm-mesh sieve and pressed using a hydrostatic press (3.46x108 Pa) into pellets of 10 mm diameter. The pressed pellets were heat treated at 600 °C for the removal of organic binders followed by sintering at 1250 oC for 4 h. All heat treatments were performed in air. In order to prevent the PbO loss during high temperature sintering and to maintain desired stoichiometric, an equilibrium PbO vapor pressure was established with PbZrO3 as setter by placing pellets in a covered alumina crucible. The crystal structure and phase transition of the samples was characterized by x-ray diffraction (XRD) (Bruker D8 Advance system) using CuKα radiation. A step size 0.01o and scanning speed of 3°/min were chosen. XRD patterns were recorded over the angular range 20°-80° (2θ) with wavelength of λ = 1.5405 Å. Variable-temperature XRD measurements was performed in high vacuum using an Anton Paar HTK-1200N high temperature chamber, which is designed to be used in the range from room temperature up to 1300 °C. The sample is mounted on an alumina sample holder, and just below the sample the temperature sensor is located. The determination of cell parameters was carried out with DIFFRACplus TOPAS™ software supplied by Bruker. The micro-Raman measurements were performed in the backscattering geometry using the Jobin-Yvon T64000 spectrometer. The excitation radiation of 514.5 nm from a coherent Ar+ laser was focused onto the sample surface. The scattering light was dispersed by samples and collected with a charge coupled device (CCD) detector. The flat polished surfaces of the sintered pellets were electroded with high purity silver paint and then dried at 200 oC before making any electrical measurement. Dielectric measurements (capacitance and loss factor) were performed in the temperature range of 100 oC to 600 oC for frequencies between 100 Hz to 1 MHz by using a programmable temperature controller (MMR K-20) and an impedance analyzer (HP 4294A). Ferroelectric hysteresis loops were measured using a hysteresis loop tester (Radiant Technologies RT6000 HVS) at 50 Hz in a voltage range from 100 V to 3000 V. Temperature dependent magnetic measurements were carried out using a Quantum Design MPMS XL-7 SQUID magnetometer while, room temperature magnetic measurements were performed using a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM Lakeshore model 142A).
Temperature XRD studies confirm the existence of a structural phase transition in PZTFT x=0.3 and x=0.4 systems from orthorhombic to tetragonal structure with lowering in temperature. The XRD data show no second phase at the 1% level over all the temperature regions. The temperature evolutions of the 101, 110, 200, 211, and 220 pseudo cubic Bragg reflections of PZTFT ceramic are shown in Figure 1(a) and 1(b) respectively. At low temperature T< 473 K (x= 0.4) and T< 498 K (x= 0.3) the peaks are wide and the characteristic orthorhombic splitting (002, 200, 020 and 112, 211, 121) of the peaks is seen in Figure 1(c). With further temperature increase the triplet peak gradually transforms to a doublet peak, the reflections 002, 200, and 112, 211 become more resolved and better separated, which shows the evolution of phases from orthorhombic (low temperature) to tetragonal (high temperature) (O-T). In order to resolve the ceramic patterns 23 reported in Figure 1, we fitted into separate Bragg components without any suggestion of a concrete structural model, applying the pattern decomposition method 24 and applying the whole-powder pattern decomposition (WPPD) method proposed by Pawley. This method can refine the unit cell parameters and decompose the whole powder pattern into individual reflections, implying a crystal system and calculating the cell parameters. The concrete computer program applied to carry out the calculations was the Bruker DIFFRACplus TOPAS™ software. This is a graphics based; nonlinear least-squares profile analysis that integrates between other features via the WPPD Pawley method. The crystal structure refinements were performed for diffraction patterns recorded from temperature from 373 K to 773 K. The best agreement between the experimental data and theoretical models were achieved in case of P222 and Pmm2 space groups for orthorhombic and P4/m and P4mm for tetragonal. The difference between calculated parameters in each case is within the error of the refinements. XRD analysis could not distinguish between two orthorhombic phases at room temperature – P222 (D2) or Pmm2 (C2v), nor between two tetragonal phases at elevated temperatures – P4/m (C4h) or P4mm (C4v); however, from crystallography is known that orthorhombic-sphenoidal (D2-P222) and orthorhombic-pyramidal (C2v-Pmm2) are enantiomorphic and polar types respectively. On the other hand tetragonal- dipyramidal (C4h-P4/m) and ditetragonal pyramidal (C4v-P4mm) are centrosymetric and polar respectively. Hence one way to assignment the right space group of each phase of the PZTFT ceramics is exploring the possibility of ferroelectricity of the sample in each phase and verifying that the transition is second-order thermodynamically, so that a group-subgroup relation exists between the upper and lower symmetries. Below we describe in detail these possibilities.

 Raman spectroscopy is a versatile technique to investigate the crystal structure of the materials at global (bulk crystal symmetry) and local (nano-scale crystal symmetry) level. Raman scattering is sensitive to variations in inter-atomic potentials and local site coordination at atomic level. For this reason Raman scattering has been extensively used to investigate the structure and structural instability through the observation of frequency shifts, linewidths, or intensities of Raman-active phonons. Temperature dependent Raman spectra of PZTFT for x=0.3 and x=0.4 respectively are shown in Figure 2(a) and 2(b) respectively varying from room temperature until 773 K. The Raman spectrum of ceramic PZT contains a series of broad overlapping bands, which is typical of samples with a tetragonal phase in this composition range. According to the factor group analysis, tetragonal PZT has 12 optical normal modes Γ = 4E + 4A1+E+B1, of which E, A1, and B1 are both Raman and IR actives and one pair of A1 + E correspond to the three acoustic branches . 27 Raman spectra of PZT show the low-frequency phonon modes E(TO1) and E(LO1) at ∼90 cm-1 and ∼132 cm-1; four additional peaks at 224 cm-1, 275 cm-1, 565 cm-1, and 740 cm-1, which are assigned to E(TO2), B1+E and A1(TO3), and A1(LO) modes respectively. However the lowest E frequency modes are not seen clearly in PZTFT spectra when x > 0.2 because of strong Rayleigh scattering intensity. The modes E(TO2) and B1+E correspond to BO6 rotation, while A1(TO3) and A1(LO) are related to O-B-O bending and B-O stretching of oxygen octahedral respectively. These modes shifted towards lower frequencies with increase in PFT content. The decrease in wave number with increasing PFT content is due to the large difference in the atomic mass of Zr (91.22 amu) and Ti (47.87 amu) when they are replaced by Fe (55 amu), and Ta (180 amu) at the B-site. The high-frequency phonon mode at ∼834 cm-1 appears for x = 0.1 (10% PFT) resembling the A1g phonon mode of PFT (x = 1.0) at 854 cm-1 which is attributed to the vibration of oxygen ion in the oxygen octahedra of ordered nanodomains having local space group Fm3m. The weak bands observed below 600 cm-1 were assigned to the disorder-induced modes in the disordered matrix having the space group of Pm3m. It is clear from Figure 2(a) and 2(b) that the Raman spectra change in the vicinity of phase transition from orthorhombic (Pmm2) to tetragonal (P4mm) (O-T) for PZTFT x=0.3 and x=0.4 at 475 K and 530 K respectively support the XRD observation. Close look of temperature-dependent Raman data revealed the almost disappearance of A1(TO) 565 cm-1 polarization modes, the most prominent effects was observed in E(TO) 200-300 cm-1 frequency range. These modes almost disappeared above the ferroelectric phase transition temperature (marked in the Figure 2). It is interesting to note that these optic modes are more responsible for polarization in the system which diminished after the ferroelectric phase transition as evidenced by Raman spectra. Figure 3 present the proposed deconvoluted Raman spectra of the PZTFT x=0.4 at different temperature representing the evolution of symmetry with temperature: Orthorhombic-300 K, tetragonal-523 K, and cubic-1123 K. The Raman spectra recorded within orthorhombic and tetragonal symmetries can be well deconvolution into 12 and 8 lines respectively. The quantities analysis of Raman spectra near the three phase transition regions with different crystal structure were carried out with the help of the damped harmonic oscillator model (DHO). Raman spectra of the three crystal structure has been fitted with the spectral response function 33,34 \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}\begin{document}\begin{equation} S(v) = \sum\nolimits_i {\frac{{\chi _{oi} \Gamma _i v_{0i}^2 v}}{{(v^2 - v_{0i}^2) + \Gamma _i^2 v^2 }}} F(v,T) \end{equation}\end{document}S(v)=∑iχoiΓiv0i2v(v2−v0i2)+Γi2v2F(v,T)
where F(ν, T) = [n(ν) + 1] (Stokes scattering) and n(ν) = [exp (hν/kT) − 1]−1. The parameters in Eq. (1) amplitude χ0 (in arbitrary units), the mode frequency ν0, the damping constant Γ, and the temperature T, describe each phonon mode as a DHO. All the Raman active modes were fitted with the unconstrained variables parameters at representative temperature. Raman spectra at the lowest frequencies were fitted with a Gaussian and a Lorentzian both centered in a zero-frequency shift that allow a better deconvolution of the spectra. The group theory analysis allows the presence of 12 and 8 active Raman modes in the case of orthorhombic and tetragonal respectively (see Table I). The unambiguous assignments of Raman active modes for polycrystalline ceramic composite materials were not scientifically viable at least for the orthorhombic phase (Figure 3(a)). The broad Raman lines were observed for these materials that complicate the fit analysis processes which could lead more uncertainties in assignments, to avoid any possible mistake, only peak positions for orthorhombic phase were assigned. For accurate assignments, polarized Raman analysis of PZTFT single crystal or epitaxial films is desirable. In case of the tetragonal phase, we used the assignment of Raman modes already reported for Pb(ZrxTi1-x)O3 with x ≤ 0.52, since in this composition the PZT belongs to the P4mm (C4v) point group ,27,34,35 as is shown in Figure 3(b), the fitting Raman modes are in good agreement with those reported. The changes from orthorhombic to tetragonal phase transition are manifested mainly by the reduction of number of lines from 12 to 8. As expected, none of the prominent peaks were observed at 1123 K during the second phase transition from tetragonal to cubic. The temperature dependences of the lattice parameters of PZTFT, x=0.4 and x=0.3 are presented in Figure 4(a) and 4(b) (upper). For the data presented we chose Pmm2 and P4mm as space groups in orthorhombic and tetragonal phase respectively. As discussed above, the criteria we use to determine the space group were: 1) If the space group is polar; 2) If the space group of orthorhombic phase is a subgroup of that of the tetragonal phase. From Figure 6, temperature variations of polarization vs. electric field show that both phases are ferroelectric (detailed temperature variation of the ferroelectric properties will be presented below). For the tetragonal phase (high temperature) we select the P4mm polar point group since P4/m is centrosymetric. For orthorhombic (low temperature), Pmm2 point group is polar, P222 is emantiomorphic (in which there is the possibility of polar or nonpolar structures); however Pmm2 is a subgroup of P4mm.
Study of dielectric, Phase transition from orthorhombic to tetragonal was also observed from temperature variation of the dielectric permittivity and dielectric loss at different frequencies, and temperature dependent lattice parameters; measurement in the range from 300 K to 800 K. The observation of dielectric maxima peak had shown in Figure 4(a) and 4(b) (lower) evidence a ferroelectric-ferroelectric phase transition of PZTFT with rise of temperature. As in normal ferroelectrics, the dielectric permittivity of PZTFT compounds increases gradually with increasing temperature up to the transition Curie temperature (Tc) and thereafter it decreases. Phase transitions for both compositions are of typical second order ferroelectric phase transitions. The inverse of the slope of dielectric permittivity was found 2:1 (not shown here) matched with the Landau Theory for second order ferroelectric phase transitions . 36 The Tc for x=0.3 and x=0.4 were determined to be 520 K and 475 K respectively, indicating a downward shift with the increase of PFT percent. A shoulder in loss tangent near the dielectric permittivity maxima peak with further slow increase in loss at elevated temperature was also observed. It is worth mentioning that the orthorhombic lattice parameters overlap near the phase transition and it was hard to fit with either of the tetragonal/orthorhombic symmetries. Above observation also suggests the transition period of crystals in which system was in non equilibrium state while with further increase in temperature it fitted well with the tetragonal symmetry.
Polarization
 Figure 5 shows the room temperature polarization- electric field (P-E) hysteresis loop of PZTFT ceramic with x=0.3 and x=0.4. Well-saturated P-E loops were observed in both PZTFT systems; the remanent polarization was enhanced from ∼14 μC/cm2 to ∼16 μC/cm2 with increase of PZT percentage in PZTFT composites; however, no significance change was observed in coercive field (Ec ∼ 15 kV/cm). The temperature evolution of the polarization favors an orthorhombic to tetragonal phase transition in both the systems. Figure 6 shows anomalous enhancement of polarization with perfect square loops above the ferroelectric phase transition of PZTFT (x=0.3 @ 520 K); the enhancement in polarization value near the phase transition (520 K) confirms the O-T phase transition and rules out a higher symmetry cubic phase with zero polarization. High- and low-temperature Raman studies revealed two more structural phase transition, one at higher temperature for tetragonal-cubic (T-C) (> 1300 K) and other from orthorhombic-rhombohedral (O-R) near 250 K. The details of these low and high temperature phase transitions will be presented in a separate paper.
Magnetization
 Pure PZTFT (x= 0.3 and 0.4) ceramics with no impurity phase within the detection limit of XRD showed well behaved magnetization (M) vs. applied field (H) hysteresis at room temperature, as shown in Figure 7. These systems showed the good remanent magnetization (0.07 and 0.024 emu/g for x=0.3 and 0.4 respectively at room temperature) which is comparable to the known room temperature multiferroics including bismuth ferrite and other lead based multiferroic relaxors. 37–42 The room temperature magnetization value of 0.4 Bohr magnetons per Fe+3 spin using known density of 7.5 g/cc and cell volume of 64 x 10-18 cm-3 is quite reasonable. This magnetization is equivalent to about 7 % of the saturation value of 5.9 μB. The Fe+3 ions are known to cluster in pure PbFe1/2Nb1/2O3 and PbFe1/2Ta1/2, which is responsible for the relatively high magnetic ordering temperature for only 15-20 % Fe-occupation of the B-site in our specimens . 43,44 The magnetization M(T) shows only one divergence (near 50 K) with no sign of a second phase or phase transition. It is worth mentioning that with increase in PFT contents (x=0.6) this system does not show any increased magnetic ordering; x= 0.4 possess low magnetization compare to x= 0.3. We have done a careful detailed magnetic study of the system and repeated the measurements with samples synthesized at different times with the same results. Only certain threshold percentages of PFT activate the magnetic ordering. For further insight in the magnetic behavior of these samples, field-cooled (FC) and zero-field-cooled (ZFC) studies were carried out over a wide range of temperature. Figure 8 shows the ZFC and FC data of PZTFT (x=0.3). These show nonlinear non-zero magnetization up to room temperature; magnetic irreversibility (Mirr= MFC-MZFC) especially for low ZFC persists for wide temperature regions to 4th or 5th order of the magnitude. A sharp increase in magnetization was observed below 50 K. Neels temperature (TN) related to the original PFT was not observed in ZFC and FC magnetization curve suggests the existence of super-antiferromagnetic and/or super-paramagnetic clusters far above the ambient temperature. Actually both super-paramagnetic cluster model and super-antiferromagnetic cluster model are used to explain the possible presence of weak magnetism in the lead based multiferroics. R. Blinc et al. has carried out the electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) experiment on PFN ceramic and explains the presence of weak magnetization above Neel temperature in context of super paramagnetic cluster model. The explanation of observed weak magnetization in M vs H curve or ZFC-FC data in PFN, PFT, or PFW (same class) materials was first given by Prof. Smolenskii, they explained on the basis of super-exchange interaction at B-site octahedral and also spin canting. The existence of magnetization above the Neel temperature in sol-gel prepared PFN ceramic had explained on the basis of spins canting and super-paramagnetic ions cluster. Peng et al. in PFN-Pb(Mn,W)O3 system explains the existence of magnetization on superantiferromagnetic (SAF) model. Still the observations of weak magnetization in the lead based frustrated system are very poorly understood. We have not observed any noticeable anomaly near the TN of PFT for investigated solid solution, although, Martinez et al. observed very weak anomaly near Neel temperature for polycrystalline PFT ceramics.42
Electric control of magnetization: 
 ME coupling was measured on conducting (La,Sr)MnO3 (LSMO) coated PZTFT (x= 0.3) ceramic at room temperature, moderate electric control of remanent magnetization and coercive filed was observed. The detailed growth conditions for the conducting LSMO were presented elsewhere. One electrode was made of conducting silver paste whereas the other was LSMO. LSMO was purposely deposited on one side of the PZTFT to observe the high ME coupling due to the ferromagnetic (FE)-antiferromagnetic (AFM) interface. Due to FE-AFE coupling at the interface a step-like behavior was observed in the M(H) curve, as can be seen in Figure 9. Applied electric fields also modify the magnetic coercive field by (50 -100 Oe). The remanent magnetization or magnetization at very low field (50 Oe) changes by ΔM= 0.0021+/-0.0002 emu under the application of a modest electric field (ΔE= 35 kV/cm). Under the application of +Ve and –Ve external electric field, a significant amount of remanent magnetization was changed. ME coefficient were calculated from change in magnetization (under @ 50 Oe) under applied external electric field, change in magnetization follows the linear relation with change in electric field. The calculated ME-coefficients α = μ0 ΔM/ΔE is 1.3 x 10e-11 s/m. The effect of positive and negative external electric field on remanent magnetization is shown in the inset of Figure 9. Dynamic converse magneto-electric measurements were performed on poled ceramics samples. The observed changes in magnetization under electric field follow linear relation suggest PM (polarization X magnetization) type of coupling as expected and observed in BFO and other related multiferroics. The present ME values comparable than the value obtained for single phase Cr2O3, α ∼ 4.1 × 10−12 s/m45,46 and also for other single phase materials . 42,47
We have successfully prepared single-phase PZTFT ceramics by conventional a solid-state route. Temperature-dependent XRD revealed a structural phase transition from tetragonal to orthorhombic under cooling. PZTFT shows classic textbook example of several sequential phase transitions: cubic-tetragonal (ca. 1300 K) to tetragonal- orthorhombic (520 K for x= 0.3 and 475 K for x= 0.4); and to orthorhombic-rhombohedral (230 - 270 K) – a sequence similar to that in barium titanate. It showed both ferroelectric and ferromagnetic ordering at room temperature with very low leakage even at 550 K (perfect square hysteresis at 550 K). ZFC and FC data display nonlinear magnetic susceptibility with irreversibility up to room temperature. ME coupling is of the same order of magnitude as in the single-phase multiferroic PFT.