Sulfonated poly(ether ether ketone) (S-PEEK) with 40% of degree of sulfonation was studied using full atomistic molecular dynamics simulation in order to investigate the nanophase-segregated structures, focusing on the sulfonate group and water phase at various water contents such as 10, 13, and 20 wt %. By analyzing the pair correlation function, it is found that as the water solvation of sulfonate groups proceeds more with increasing water content, the distance between sulfonate groups is increased from 4.4 Å (10 wt %) to 4.8 Å (13 wt %) to 5.4 Å (20 wt %), and the hydronium ions (H3O+) become farther apart from the sulfonate groups. The water coordination number for water and the water diffusion are enhanced with increasing water content because the internal structure of the water phase in S-PEEK approaches that of bulk water. Compared to the Nafion and Dendrion membranes, the S-PEEK membrane shows less internal structure in the water phase and smaller water diffusion, indicating that the S-PEEK has less nanophase segregation than the Nafion and Dendrion membranes.
Although the perfluorosulfonic acid (PFSA) type of polymers such as Nafion have attracted enormous attention from the polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) fuel cell community due to their high proton conductivity and excellent chemical stability, the drawbacks of this PFSA-based polymers, such as high cost in production, drastic decrease in proton conductivity with dehydration, and poor fuel crossover in direct methanol fuel cell, have also stimulated another intensive study in developing non-PFSA-based polymers, especially sulfonated hydrocarbon-based polymers such as sulfonated poly(ether ether ketone) (S-PEEK), sulfonated poly(styrene) (S-PS), and sulfonated poly(benzimidazole). S-PEEK (Fig. 1) has been known as one of the promising candidates for fuel cell application since it has high thermo-oxidative stability and extraordinary mechanical properties as well as high cost effectiveness. From Fig. 1, it should be noticed that S-PEEK has sulfonate groups directly attached to the backbone in comparison with Nafion that has sulfonate groups on its side chains. Kobayashi et al.2 reported that the S-PEEK can have high proton conductivity of 10− 4–10−2 S/cm at room temperature. Kreuer 3 found that the membrane made of S-PEEK has narrower and less connected hydrophilic channels compared to that of Nafion, which causes a reduction in the electro-osmotic drag and water permeation in addition to the lower proton conductivity than Nafion. Zaidi et al.4 observed an enhancement in proton conductivity from the composite membrane consisting of S-PEEK and solid heteropolyacids. Recently, Kaliaguine et al.5 reported that the proton conductivity and mechanical strength of the S-PEEK membranes are affected by the casting solvent, which explains the reason for the broad range of experimental data on the membrane properties. Xing et al.6 found that the proton conductivity of S-PEEK is increased with increasing degree of sulfonation (DS). Even though the amount of studies on this material have been growing so far, we still lack knowledge about its various properties such as nanophase-segregated structure, water diffusion, and so on. Furthermore, the relationship between such nanophase-segregated structure and the transport properties has not been thoroughly discussed at the molecular level since Kreuer 3 discussed that the S-PEEK membrane has less segregated morphology than the Nafion. In this context, the molecular dynamics (MD) simulation has been noticed in the fuel cell community as a useful tool providing detailed information on the polymer membrane at various thermodynamic conditions. Indeed, a massive amount of MD studies have been published recently. Such MD simulation techniques have been successfully used to investigate the nanophase segregation and transport property of hydrated Nafion membrane, and thus the simulated structures and properties have been widely taken into account to understand underpinning physics of the PEM fuel cell in collaboration with experimental observations. It should be noticed, however, that most of the MD simulation studies have been biased toward the Nafion membrane system, while the S-PEEK membrane has not been seriously simulated yet even though it is very desirable to obtain information on the structure and properties at the molecular level. In the present study, therefore, we have investigated the hydrated S-PEEK membrane using full atomistic MD simulation approach in order to characterize the nanophase-segregated structure, especially focusing on the distribution and the solvation of the sulfonate groups in the presence of water for the fuel cell application. The simulation results for the S-PEEK membrane are discussed in comparison with the experimental data available in literatures as well as those for the Nafion membrane.
All simulations were carried out using a full atomistic model of S-PEEK. In order to analyze the effect of hydration on the structures and properties of the membrane, various water contents such as 10, 13, and 20 wt % were introduced in the membrane. Please note that we do not apply an external electric field in our simulation.

 We used the DREIDING force field ,24 a generic force field for materials, as previously used to study Nafion 9,17,18, 25–28 and Dendrion 7,8 as well as various molecular systems such as hydrogel ,29,30 liquid–liquid and liquid–air interfaces ,31,32 and molecular self-assembly. The water was described using the F3C force field. These force field parameters are described in the original papers 24,39,40 and in our previous study 9 on hydrated Nafion. Thus the force field has the formE=totEvdW+EQ+Ebond+Eangle+Etorsion+Einversion,where Etot, EvdW, EQ, Ebond, Eangle, Etorsion, and Einversion are total energies, van der Waals, electrostatic, bond stretching, angle bending, torsion, and inversion components, respectively. The individual atomic charges of the copolymer were assigned using the charge equilibration method 41 optimized to reproduce the Mulliken charges of small molecules. The atomic charges of water molecule were from the F3C water model. The particle–particle particle–mesh method 42 was used to calculate the electrostatic interactions. All the annealing and MD simulations were performed using the MD code LAMMPS (large-scale atomic/molecular massively parallel simulator) from Plimpton et al. at Sandia 43,44 with modifications to handle our force fields . 9,32 The equations of motion were integrated using the velocity Verlet algorithm 45 with a time step of 1.0 fs. The Nosé–Hoover temperature thermostat 46–48 for the NVT and NPT MD simulations used a damping relaxation time of 0.1 ps and the dimensionless cell mass factor of 1.0.
Construction and equilibration of the amorphous 
 The simulated hydrated membrane systems consist of two chains of S-PEEK and water molecules for 10, 13, and 20 wt %, as summarized in Table I. The degree of polymerization and the DS for the S-PEEK chain were set to 100 and 40, respectively (Fig. 2). The sulfonated monomers were selected randomly (with a degree of randomness of 1.03) from 100 monomeric units in the backbone and all of the sulfonic acid groups are assumed to be ionized as assumed in the previous studies . 7,8 The initial amorphous structures of hydrated S-PEEK were constructed in a three dimensional periodic cell using the amorphous builder of CERIUS2.49 Since such initial structures of polymeric materials may include unstable conformations, they should be equilibrated first before analyzing the properties of our interest. In this point, it should also be stressed that the relaxation of polymers is very slow for standard equilibrium MD to reach equilibrium states. Therefore, in order to efficiently obtain well equilibrated structures for complex amorphous polymers, we applied the annealing procedure as used in the previous studies of Nafion and Dendrion membranes, 7–9 which accelerates the attainment of equilibrium by driving the system repeatedly through 5 cycles of thermal annealing (between 300 and 600 K) and volume annealing (between densities of 0. 5–1.1 times the expected density). This procedure aims to help the system escape from various local minima and promote the migration of species required for phase segregation in heterogeneous systems, whose detailed steps are described in the previous publications. 7–9 After finishing the thermal-volume annealing cycles, a 100 ps NVT MD simulation and a subsequent 500 ps NPT MD simulation were performed at 353.15 K to finalize the annealing procedure. Then, 15 ns NPT MD simulations were performed at the same temperature to fully equilibrate the structure (Fig. 3) from which the last 5 ns parts were chosen for the statistical analyses of properties. The equilibrated densities obtained from the simulations are summarized in Table I. In this point, it should be noticed that there is no rigorous way to guarantee that a simulated polymeric system is fully equilibrated, although multiple indirect evidences can be found from the agreement of thermodynamic properties (densities and energies) between simulations and experiments. Therefore, we presume the extent of equilibration in our simulations from leveled-off trend of such thermodynamic properties.
As discussed in previous studies, 7–9 the nanophase segregation between hydrophobic polymer domain and water-associated hydrophilic phase is the key variable in harnessing PEM fuel cell for desirable properties since the water channel continuously distributed throughout membrane is essential for proton conduction. Since this water channel in nanophase segregation is formed with the strongly hydrophilic sulfonate groups, we analyzed the spatial distribution of sulfonate group as a function of water content. Figure 4 shows the pair correlation functions for sulfur–sulfur pairs, gS–S(r). This pair correlation function, gA−B(r) indicates the probability density of finding B atoms at a distance r from A atoms, averaged over the equilibrium trajectory asgA−B(r)=(nB4πr2Δr)(NBV),where nB is the number of particle B located at the distance r in a shell of thickness Δr from particle A, NB is the number of B particles in the system, and V is the total volume of the system. In Fig. 4, it is clearly shown that the peak observed for 10 wt % becomes weakened and broadened and the peak position is shifted to the farther distance with increasing water content (from at ∼4.4 Å at 10 wt % to ∼4.8 Å at 13 wt % to ∼5.4 Å at 20 wt % water content), directly indicating that the distance between sulfonate groups increase as a function of the water content. First of all, we compared the first peak of the pair correlation ρgS–S(r) (hereafter the number density ρ is multiplied for direct comparison) in the hydrated S-PEEK membrane with those in the Nafion 9 and Dendrions . 7,8 It is found that the position of the first peak, that is, the dominant distance between nearest neighboring sulfurs is ranged from 4.7 to 6.0 Å in various materials (S-PEEK, Nafion, and Dendrion) for 10–20 wt % of the water content. However, in contrast to the Dendrion 7 whose S–S distance is nearly constant regardless of water content due to the covalent connectivity between sulfurs, the hydrated S-PEEK shows increasing S–S distance with increasing water content. Regarding the reason that the first peak position of ρgS–S(r) changed in the S-PEEK membrane, we think this is because the sulfonate groups of S-PEEK are directly attached to the backbone chain and thus their locations are affected by the swelling-induced conformational change in the backbone. We found that this also agreed with the simulation study done by Cui et al.,23 reporting that the shorter side chains of PFSA polymer were less affected by the hydration than the longer side chains of Nafion. To quantitatively characterize this, we checked the volume expansion due to the increasing water content. As summarized in Table I, the volume of membrane with 13 and 20 wt % of water content is increased by 0.7% and 2%, respectively, in comparison with that with 10 wt % of water content. However, such a shift of the first peak in Fig. 4 (0.4 and 1.0 Å for 13 and 20 wt % of water content, respectively) does not seem to be fully explained only by the volume expansion because the contribution from such volume expansion as a function of water content would be just ∼0.05 and ∼0.5 Å, on the average, for 13 and 20 wt % of water content, respectively, assuming that the swelling affects the interatomic distance homogeneously throughout the system (∼Δx2+Δy2+Δz2=3×0.12=∼0.05 Å for 13 wt % of water content and 3×0.32=∼0.5 Å for 20 wt % of water content where Δx, Δy, and Δz are the increment of system size in the x, y, and z axis directions, as shown in Fig. 3). Therefore, we need to think of another source for this peak shift, which is the solvation of sulfonate group. Figures 5(a) and 5(b) show the pair correlation function for sulfur–oxygen (water) pairs, ρgS–O(water)(r) and sulfur-oxygen (hydronium) pairs, ρgS–O(hydronium)(r), respectively, giving us a direct information on how many water or hydronium surround the sulfonate group. From Fig. 5(a), it is clear that the intensity of the peak ranging at 3. 0–4.7 Å increases as the water content increases without a shift of the peak position, which indicates that the number of water molecules surrounding sulfonate groups is increased with increasing water content. On the contrary, it is observed that ρgS–O(hydronium)(r) peak is decreased with increasing water content. We think that this trend is due to the solvation of hydronium as well as sulfonate: more water molecules solvate hydronium and sulfonate and thereby the electrostatic interaction between hydronium and sulfonate is screened by the water molecules, which has been observed by Cui et al. in their simulation study on short-side-chain polymer membrane (SSC) and Nafion. For quantitative analysis, the averaged number of water and hydronium molecules surrounding each sulfonate group, so-called the coordination number (CN) is counted for by integrating the first peaks in the pair correlation functions. The limits of integration are from the start of the peak to the first minimum. Since we found that the position of such minimum does not change significantly with changing water content, we used a 4.7 Å cutoff to be consistent. The CN is summarized in Fig. 6 and Table II, which shows that the water CN for sulfonate is increased from 2.8 to 4.6, whereas the hydronium CN for sulfonate is decreased from 1.4 to 0.9, as a function of water content. Additionally, through this solvation shell analysis, several interesting points are found. First, at lower water content (10 wt %), the value of the hydronium CN is larger than 1.0. Considering that this is possible only when each sulfonate group has an extra hydronium partially shared with neighboring sulfonate groups, the observation of higher hydronium CN at lower water content is consistent with the close distance between sulfonate groups shown in Fig. 4. In other words, at 10 wt % of water content, the hydronium molecules are located near the sulfonate groups and sulfonate groups are distributed closely to each other, so that one sulfonate group can have more than one hydronium around itself. As the distance between sulfonate groups becomes larger by more water (Fig. 4), such hydronium sharing disappears and the hydronium CN becomes smaller. Another point in Table II is that the CN is smaller than the value of λ (=total number of water molecules/number of sulfonate group). Although λ is a widely used parameter to express the amount of water, it is apt to be misunderstood as the number of water molecules per sulfonate group that is actually the definition of the water CN. At lower water content, λ is similar to the CN because a relatively small amount of water molecules gather around the hydrophilic sulfonate groups rather than other hydrophobic places. However, once the place nearby the sulfonates is saturated at a certain water content, the excessive water molecules should form their own water phase, which is much less correlated with sulfonate groups and hence the difference between CN and λ becomes larger and larger.
Water phase in the 
 Since the water phase is used as a proton conduction channel in the membrane, extensive studies on the proton transfer in water 50–59 and in PEMs 52–54, 60–63 have led to the general consensus that the proton diffusion rate in bulk water is four to eight times larger than in the hydrated membrane. As summarized by Kreuer 52,54 and by Paddison ,63 such high proton conduction in bulk water is attributed to a well-organized and compact hydrogen bonding network that aids efficient proton hopping. In contrast, it is generally known that the water phase in membranes has less developed internal structure due to the reduced hydrogen bond connectivity, which leads to a less proton conduction. Therefore, it should be very desirable to investigate the internal structure of water phase in S-PEEK membrane as a function of water content to achieve a quantitative relationship between structure and performance of PEM fuel cell. In order to characterize the internal structure in the water phase dispersed within a hydrated membrane, we calculated ρgO(water)–O(water)(r), as shown in Fig. 7(a). As observed in the previous simulation studies on Nafion 9 and Dendrion ,7,8 the intensity of the pair correlation is increased with increasing water content, meaning that as the water content is increased, the structure of the water phase is developed more until it reaches the level of bulk water. This structural development of water phase was also evaluated by counting the water CN surrounding each water molecule. Figure 7(b) shows the change in the water CN for water molecule as a function of water content in comparison with Nafion 9 and Dendrions 7,8 as well as bulk water. First, it is found that the water CN is increased with increasing water content, which is because water molecules form their own phase and the portion of water molecules surrounded by neighboring water molecules is increased. Another point from Fig. 7(b) is that the CN has larger value in the Nafion and Dendrion membrane than in the S-PEEK with the same water content. This comparison indicates that hydrated membranes made of Nafion or Dendrions have more structured water phase than S-PEEK membranes. As discussed in the previous study 7 comparing poly(tetrafluoroethylene) (PTFE) with PS and poly(epichlorohydrin) in Dendrion membrane in terms of the extent of nanophase segregation, this is because the structural development of water phase within the polymeric membrane is driven by the nanophase segregation between the polymer phase and the water phase. Thus, a more nanophase segregation is achieved using more hydrophobic polymer such as PTFE as more water molecules gather together to form the bulk waterlike structure. That is, the less hydrophobic S-PEEK retains relatively more dispersed water in its less nanophase-segregated morphology, which is consistent with the report from Kreuer. The volume fraction of such water phase in the membrane supports the structure development of water phase in the membrane. The volume fraction of water phase in the membrane was calculated as follows:Volume fraction of water(%)=100×(Vfree,no water−Vfree,water)/Vtot,where Vfree,no water and Vfree,water are the free volume of the membrane using a 1.4 Å probe radius after and before removing water molecules, respectively. Figure 8 shows a linear increase in the volume fraction of the water phase in the membrane as a function of water content. Here it should be noticed that the simulation trend in Fig. 8 has smaller slope than the reference line with 1.0 slope. The reference line with 1.0 slope is the line on which the water volume fraction is increased with the same density regardless of the water content. Thus, the result that observed line has smaller slope than the reference line, meaning that the water phase becomes denser with increasing water content. We think this is also consistent with the previous analysis for water CN via ρgO(water)–O(water)(r) claiming that the water phase develops its structure more as the membrane uptake more water content. Therefore, it is be concluded in the hydrated S-PEEK membrane that the internal structure of water phase becomes similar to that of bulk water as the water content increases.

 As addressed in the experimental 3,54,65 and simulation studies 7–9 on the transport in nanostructures, it has been found that the diffusion of water is greater in more phase-segregated structures because the phase-segregated water molecules in membranes achieve more bulk waterlike structure within its phase, and bulk water has a higher proton diffusion rate than other water phases. In this study, we investigated the water diffusion with various water contents in the hydrated S-PEEK membrane by comparing with the work done by Kreuer ,3 reporting that the diffusion of water is enhanced more in Nafion than in sulfonated PEEK because of the wider water channels in Nafion. Figure 9 and Table III summarize the mean square displacement (MSD) of water calculated from the final 5ns simulation part out of the 15 ns trajectories and the corresponding diffusion coefficients (D), respectively. The diffusion coefficient was calculated from the linear part of the MSD plot (black colored lines in Fig. 9) by assuming that they have normal diffusion with the following equation, as shown in Fig. 9(a). We calculated the diffusion coefficients using oxygen and hydrogen and found that the diffusion coefficients from each element are exactly the same,D=limx→∞16t⟨(r(t)−r(0))2⟩,where r(t) and r(0) are the positions of water at a certain time (t) and at the beginning, respectively. First, as shown in Fig. 9(a), it is found that the diffusion of water is enhanced with increasing water content, which is in accordance with the previous studies on the hydrated Dendrions . 7 Thus, we think it is a general feature of hydrated polymeric membranes that the water diffusion is enhanced in with increasing hydration as the internal structure of water phase becomes more developed at higher water content. Then, we compared the simulated water diffusion coefficients with the available experimental values (Table III). Even though the experimental S-PEEK membrane has a higher DS (∼70%) than our simulated one (40%), this comparison was carried out using a similar volume fraction of water phase with the assumption that a similar water amount provide similar conditions such as structure and distribution of water phase. Table III shows that the simulated diffusion coefficients have the same order of magnitude with the experimental ones, indicating that our simulations described the water diffusion in the hydrated S-PEEK membrane reasonably. However, it is also observed that at the lower water content, the simulated value is nine times larger than the experimental value, while those values become similar with increasing water content. We think this observation might be caused by the different levels of sulfonation of S-PEEK between our simulation and experiment because at lower water content, the water molecule in highly sulfonated PEEK (70%) has a stronger dipole-charge electrostatic interaction with the sulfonate groups due to less electrostatic screening from other water molecules and, consequently, have lower diffusion coefficient. This is consistent with our result that the sulfonates become less effective at binding with the water as the water content is increased, which is observed in our ρgS–O(water)(r). In this point, despite a good agreement between simulations and experiments, as shown in Table III, it should be necessary to mention about the limitation of full atomistic MD simulation in studying the transport property through polymeric membrane because most of the polymer chain relaxations are not observed during a short simulation in several decades of nanosecond. Thus, it would be safe to have qualitative comparison among simulations since all simulations were performed using the same condition. However, it is still worth asking the origin of such a good agreement in Table III. Currently, we think that such agreement between simulation and experiment would be due to the nature of water dynamics in well-developed nanophase-segregated morphology. In other words, the water diffusion might proceed independent of the dynamic chain relaxation when the membrane has well-developed nanophase-segregation and well-connected water channels. This infers that the effect of chain relaxation on the water diffusion would be reduced at high water content. Next, the water diffusion in this S-PEEK membrane is compared to that in the Nafion and Dendrion membranes. It is clearly observed in Fig. 9(b) that the simulated water diffusion coefficient in the S-PEEK is smaller than that in the Nafion and Dendrion membrane at 20 wt % of water content. Especially, the water diffusion coefficient in the S-PEEK is smaller by one order of magnitude than that of the Nafion membrane. Since the diffusion of water is facilitated in the more nanophase-segregated structure, our simulated diffusion coefficient indicates that the nanophase segregation between water phase and hydrophobic polymer phase is less in the S-PEEK membrane than in the Nafion and Dendrion membranes. Based on the current observation on this water diffusion, it would be a reasonable prediction that the proton diffusion in this S-PEEK membrane is also smaller than in the Nafion and Dendrion membranes.
Using full atomistic simulation approach, we investigated the S-PEEK (40% of DS) with various water contents (10, 13, and 20 wt %) at 353.15 K. The equilibrated morphology of hydrated S-PEEK membrane was obtained through 15 ns NPT MD simulation after the annealing simulations. In order to characterize the nanostructure of such hydrated S-PEEK membranes, first, we calculated the pair correlation function for sulfur–sulfur pairs, ρgS–S(r), showing that the position of the first peak is shifted from 4.4 Å at 10 wt % of water content to 4.8 Å at 13 wt % to 5.4 Å at 20 wt % of water content, respectively. This result indicates that the sulfur–sulfur distance is increased with increasing water content. By investigating the pair correlation function of sulfur–oxygen (water), ρgS–O(water)(r), it is found that such an increase in the sulfur–sulfur distance is due to the solvation of sulfonate group by water molecules as well as the volume expansion due to the hydration. In addition, analyzing ρgS–O(water)(r) and ρgS–O(hydronium)(r), it is found that the water CN of sulfonate is increased from 2.8 to 4.6 with increasing water content, whereas the CN of hydronium for sulfonate is decreased from 1.4 to 0.9. From these results, it is thought that the sulfonate groups and the hydroniums are solvated more by adding more water, and thereby the distance between sulfonates groups is increased, making the number of partially shared hydronium smaller. The ρgO(water)–O(water)(r) was also analyzed as a function of water content, showing that the water CN for water increases with increasing water content. We think this is the evidence that the water molecules form water phase instead of being spread, though the membrane as the water content is increased. Thus, the structure of such water phase seems to approach the bulk waterlike structure with more water. On the other hand, compared to the Nafion and Dendrion, it is found that the S-PEEK has less developed internal structure in water phase, which is consistent with the previous finding that the structural development in water phase depends on the nanophase segregation. The water diffusion coefficients were calculated from the final 5 ns part out of the 15 ns NPT MD simulations. It is found that the water diffusion is enhanced with increasing water content, which was consistently observed in the simulation study of hydrated Dendrion membranes . 7,8 Besides, through comparison with Nafion 7–9 and Dendrion ,7,8 the observation that the water diffusion coefficient in the hydrated S-PEEK is smaller than in the hydrated Nafion and Dendrion membranes implies that the nanophase segregation in the hydrated S-PEEK membrane is less than that in the Nafion and Dendrion membranes.