In this letter, we report that the charge/orbital order state of bulk antiferromagnetic Sm0.5Ca0.5MnO3 is suppressed and confirms the appearance of weak ferromagnetism below 65 K followed by a low temperature spin glass like transition at 41 K in its nano metric counterpart. Exchange anisotropy effect has been observed in the nano manganites and can be tuned by the strength of the cooling magnetic field (Hcool). The values of exchange fields (HE), coercivity (HC), remanence asymmetry (ME) and magnetic coercivity (MC) are found to strongly depend on cooling magnetic field and temperature. HE increases with increasing Hcool but for larger Hcool, HE tends to decrease due to the growth of ferromagnetic cluster size. Magnetic training effect has also been observed and it has been analyzed thoroughly using spin relaxation model. A proposed phenomenological core-shell type model is attributed to an exchange coupling between the spin-glass like shell (surrounding) and antiferromagnetic core of Sm0.5Ca0.5MnO3 nano manganites mainly on the basis of uncompensated surface spins. Results suggest that the intrinsic phase inhomogeneity due to the surface effects of the nanostructured manganites may cause exchange anisotropy, which is of special interests for potential application in multifunctional spintronic devices.
Mixed valent manganites have attracted considerable interest due to the discovery of Colossal Magneto-resistance (CMR) as well as different magnetic sensor and recording devices . 1 The complex coupling between the spin, charge, orbital and lattice degree of freedom leads to a host of phenomenon, such as metal-insulator transition, magnetic phase transition, nano scale charge and orbital ordering. The coupling between a ferromagnet and an antiferromagnet can establish a directional anisotropy called exchange bias (EB), which is manifested by a shift in the hysteresis loop when the sample is cooled in a external magnetic field through the Neel temperature of the antiferromagnet. In particular, the magnetic properties of such nanostructure usually differ from their bulk counterpart due to the surface and size effect. The surface actually leads to a breaking of sub lattice paring in the antiferromagnet and thus to uncompensate surface spin and the appearance of net magnetic moment. Due to reduction of the size of the magnetic system, the significance of the surface spin increases. The conventional exchange bias is observed in FM-AFM multilayer films or FM nanoparticles embedded in AFM matrix. The EB effect can be found in different type of system i.e. nanoparticles where cores couple to the shells, spin glass (SG) system where FM domains couple to the antiferromagnetic domain, thin film or in double super lattices . 3,4 EB has also been observed in different phase separated manganites 5,6 and a cobalites . 7 One of the most fascinating observations was that the charge and orbital ordered antiferromagnetism in bulk manganites are suppressed in their nano particles and nano wires form, with appearances of ferromagnetic (FM) or Spin glass (SG) like phases . 8,9 Charge ordered (CO) state is usually observed in half doped manganites with relatively narrow bandwidth system. It is known that the antiferromagnetic insulating charge ordered state observed in bulk manganites is suppressed and weak ferromagnetism appears in nano sized manganites. Tokura et al.10 showed that the robustness of the charge/orbital ordering at x = 1/2 critically depends on the W (band width), which is understood as a competition between the DE interaction and the ordering of Mn3+/Mn4+ ions with a 1 : 1 ratio accompanied by simultaneous ordering of eg orbital of Mn3+ ion. In case of Sm0.5Ca0.5MnO3, the charge/orbital ordering is so strong that the critical field becomes as large as about 50 T at 4.2 K to melt the charge ordered state. Two possible scenarios have been envisaged so far in the literature behind these phenomerna: (i) the reduction of size introduces an effective hydrostatic pressure modifying the underlying charge and orbital order in the entire grain through enhanced bulk strain 11 and (ii) the entire effect is primarily driven by surface modifications of the underlying electronic interactions and electronic structure at the nano-grains with enhanced grain surface area coupled with the proliferation of disorder and defects in the nano-material. Recently, Jirak et al.13 shows that the lattice distortion, unit cell volume, Mn-O distances and octahedral tilts at room-temperature Pbnm perovskite structure of Pr0.5Ca0.5MnO3 and La0.5Ca0.5MnO3 are practically unaffected by the reduction in grain size. All these observations suggest that there are no significant structural reorganizations as the grain size is reduced. In the face of the combined evidence, the simple minded understanding of the reversal of magnetic and transport properties in the nanometric systems in terms of effective bulk pressures 11 does not seem to work and one has to look for alternatives. A core - shell type phenomenogical model was proposed, where the relaxation of the super exchange interaction on the surface of nanoparticles and nanowire allows the formation of a FM or spin glass shell ensuing in natural antiferromagnetic (AFM) / ferromagnetic (FM) or ferromagnetic (FM)/SG interface. According to Monte Carlo study of the CE–type AFM/CO phase, an increase in charge density due to the unscreened coulomb interaction drives the surface spin from an AFM/CO phase to the phase separated state and provide the FM tendency at the surface. Thus in case of nanosized manganites, the surface FM shell coupled with the antiferromagnetic core can be a natural structure for exchange bias migration. EB effect has been shown in different manganites 5,14,16 and cobalties . 17 However, a thorough research investigation on this nanocrystalline manganites Sm0.5Ca0.5MnO3 is still lacking. In this present work, we report the suppression of charge ordered state and existence of strong exchange bias in a typical nanocrystalline manganites of Sm0.5Ca0.5MnO3, showing spin glass like behavior. This result has important implication for multifunctional nano-device applications of manganites. Based on our detailed magnetic measurements carried out on the samples of Sm0.5Ca0.5MnO3 with nanograin and bulk counterpart, we have critically analyzed all the possible mechanism. The nanosized Sm0.5Ca0.5MnO3 (SCMO) were prepared using chemical route (pyrophoric process)18 The High resolution diffraction (HRXRD) patterns, obtained on PANalytical High Resolution (PW3040/60) diffractometer using Cu-Kα radiation confirm the single phase nature of the nanoparticles as shown in the Fig. 1(a). The HRTEM (JEM - 2100) and FESEM (JEOL JSM5800) images (Fig. 1(b) and inset of Fig. 1(a)) show that we have two samples of average grain size ∼ a few μm (referred to hereafter as SCMOBULK) and 17 nm (SCMO550), respectively. The magnetic measurement was carried out using a superconducting quantum interference device magnetometer (Quantum Design, MPMS). To investigate the possible structural changes, Rietveld refinement has been carried out using the high resolution x-ray diffraction data of the samples at room temperature. Figure 1(a) shows Rietveld refinement (HRXRD) of single-phase SCMO550 with orthorhombic structure. The average particle size (Φ) estimated using the standard Debye-Scherrer formula (Φ = nλ / βeff cosθ) for the most intense peak of SCMO550 sample is found to be ∼17 nm. Bright field image of SCMO550 also shows polydisperse Φ's whose distribution is given by the histogram [Fig. 1(c)] having average particle size (Φav) ∼ 17 nm. Selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of SCMO550 [inset of Fig. 1(c)] shows spotty ring that confirms the single crystalline nature of SCMO nanograins. The high resolution TEM image of a single grain (single crystalline nature) is shown in the Fig. 1(d). A typical HRTEM image having two different lattice fringes are highlighted in the above figure. The distance between two consecutive planes in the fringes is considerably smaller for the core part than that of the shell portion of the particle. A thorough analysis of their crystallographic structure has been carried out on the basis of high resolution x-ray (HRXRD) data. All the samples crystallize in orthorhombic structure with Pnma space group. We observe a slight systematic expansion of the unit cell with the decrease of grain size (for SCMO550, V= 219.84 Å3 and for SCMOBULK, V= 218.41 Å3). If this small expansion has anything to do with the charge ordering at all, it will go against the CE type in plane ordering of the orbitals (in the x-y plane). This is in accord with our observation of suppression of charge ordering in the nanometric samples. The change in unit cell volume is not significant with the change in grain size. We also notice that the maximum change in unit cell volume is only ∼ 1% for SCMO550 which translates to an insignificant resultant pressure on the grains, calculated from the Birch-Murnaghan (BM) equation of state. This implies that there is no significant role of pressure in the nanograins. Temperature and magnetic field dependent magnetization [M(T,H)] measurements of all the samples were carried out using a SQUID magnetometer (Quantum design, MPMS) from 4 to 300 K at a field of 50 Oe. Both ZFC (zero field cooled) and FC (field cooled) measurement of all the samples are shown in the Fig. 2(a). The nature of temperature dependence of M over the whole T range is very different from one another for these nano and bulk samples mainly due to the different kind of magnetic ordering. In case of SCMOBULK, a complete charge ordering transition temperature is observed at 270 K as evident from M-T (magnetization vs. temperature) nature. This typical charge order transition temperature (TCO = 270 K) consistent with the earlier result. Charge ordering in SCMOBULK system is consistent with spin ordering where an antiferromagnetic transition with CE- type ordering occurs at Neel temperature TN = 170 K. The nearly overlapped ZFC and FC curves around 34-300 K confirms the antiferromagnetic ordering. Strikingly, the CO transition is not detectable in nanosize SCMO550 sample as shown in the inset of Fig 2(a), clearly showing a destabilization of the antiferromagnetic CO state below 270 K in nanosized grains. No visible AFM transition can be found in the magnetization curve in case of SCMO550 sample. More over, the magnetization of the nanoparticle is significantly enhanced below about 100 K, pointing out the ferromagnetic tendency at low temperature. These magnetization behaviors of our nanosized SCMO sample concur well with recent observation of other CO nano manganites . 8,9 Most likely, this destabilization predominantly occurs at the magnetically disordered surface of the nano grains showing a net moment even below 270 K, originating, presumably, from the unsaturated super exchange [as well as enhanced double exchange (DE)] interactions at the surface region. These surface modifications are weakened gradually towards the core of the grain, stabilizing the AFM order in the core. Moreover, the drop of ZFC magnetization with the decrease of temperature at the low temperature regime and strong irreversibility between ZFC and FC magnetization curves for this nanometric sample demonstrates the signature of strong anisotropy (disorder) in the system. When the grain size of a system is reduced the grain surface region is enhanced compared to core of the grain mainly due to enhanced surface to volume ratio. At the grain surface, due to the presence of large number of defects, the antiferromagnetic order is disturbed and uncompensated spins will be present there. Increase of the net moment of the grain due to the destabilization of the antiferromagnetic order at the surface in the nanometric systems is the cause of the broad nature of the M-T curve around the charge order transition. There is a high probability that short ranged ferromagnetic order will develop at the surface below the charge order transition and the ferromagnetic region will coexist with antiferromagnetic regions. The so called phase separation may occur at the surface region. However, the magnetic nature of the core of the grains in the nanoparticles cannot be conclusively determined with any bulk measurement technique, like dc magnetization etc. It is also understandable that at the surface area the spins will be strongly pinned at the different pinning sites (defect sites) giving rise to a strong anisotropy. The strong anisotropic behavior is reflected in the irreversibility in the FC- ZFC magnetization of the nanometric samples. So the large difference between the ZFC and FC curve over a broad temperature range indicates the spin glass like behavior as evident from the minima of dM/dT of SCMO550, as shown in the inset of Fig. 2(a). Thus the sample SCMO550 shows a clear spin glass like transition at 41 K. To confirm the low temperature glassy state in SCMO550 sample, we have measured the temperature dependent linear and non-linear ac susceptibility (χ) at a selective frequencies (f) with f = 1, 10, 100, 1000 and 1500 Hz in an ac field of 2 Oe. Temperature dependent real (χ/) and imaginary part (χ//) are shown in the Fig. 2(b) and in the inset of Fig. 3(b). The peak shifts to a higher temperature with increasing measuring frequency. Such behavior is a signature of glassy state. At first we employ the thermal activation model and analyze the low temperature frequency dependent transition using the Arrhenius law (τ = τ0 exp (Ea/kBTƒ). Here Ea is the activation energy and Tf is the temperature corresponding to the maxima in χ/ in the low temperature regime. τ is taken as the experimental time scale 1/f. We first note that the variation of Tf is not linear with f as evident from the inset of Fig. 3(a). To verify the Arhenius law, we have plotted ln(τ) vs. Tf. Here the linear best fit result provides the unrealistic value of τ0 and Ea, so we can rule out the possibility of any thermally activated process and the possibility of superparamagnetic blocking at this temperature regime. The frequency dependence shift of the peak in χ/(T) i.e. δTf /Tf δ(logω) is found to be ∼ 0.01. The value of δTf /Tf δ(logω) for the metallic canonical spin glass system varies from 0.005 - 0.01 and 0.06 - 0.08 for insulating SG system. So the result clearly suggests that the system SCMO550 behaves more like a metallic spin glass state rather than a cluster glass state. In case of spin glass system the frequency dependence is very often analyzed by employing the dynamic scaling law of the form τ = τ0 (Tf/Tg-1)-zυ, where τ0 is the spin relaxation time, zυ is the critical exponent and Tg is the spin glass transition temperature. Tg is equivalent to the freezing temperature of spin glass in the limit of zero frequency. The best fit from χ/(T) by dynamical scaling shown in the Fig. 3(a) produces the value of Tg = 41 K which is nearly equal to the dc value found from the temperature dependent dc magnetization (inset of Fig. 2(a)). The values of zυ and τ0 are 9 and 10-14 s, respectively. The value of zυ holds satisfactory as generally observed in a canonical SG system in the range 4-12. For a conventional spin glass system typical value of τ0 is of the order of 10-12 - 10-14 s. Moreover, we observe shift in magnetic hysteresis loop while the SCMO550 sample was cooled in a static dc magnetic field. The shift is absent while the cooling field is almost zero as shown in the inset of Fig. 3(b). The asymmetric magnetic hysteresis loop shifts in both field and magnetization axes, which indicate the existence of exchange bias (EB) phenomena shown in the Fig. 3(b). The EB field HE and HC are generally defined as - (H1+H2)/2 and - (H1-H2)/2, where H1 and H2 are left and right coercive field. The remanence asymmetry ME and the magnetic coercivity MC are defined as ME = - (MR1+MR2)/2 and MC = - (MR1-MR2)/2, MR1 and MR2 are the positive and negative remanant magnetization respectively. One of the important characteristics in the exchange bias system is the magnetic training effect which describes the reduction of exchange bias field (HE) and exchange bias magnetization (ME), when the sample is continuously field cycled. For this sample, the continuous hysteresis loops were measured after the FC at 7 kOe down to 5 K from 150 K (≥ Tf) and the measuring field range is ± 30 kOe. The dependence of exchange bias field (HE) and exchange bias magnetization (ME) with the number of field cycles n is shown in the Fig. 4(a). The value of HE and ME decreases with increasing the field cycles which is in accordance with the reported results . 5,6 The relation between the HE (ME) and n can be best fitted by simple power law, $H_E - H_{E\infty}\,\alpha 1/\sqrt n$HE−HE∞α1/n where HE∞ is the EB field at n = ∞. The solid red line in the Fig. 4(a) shows the best fitting result for n > 1. The fitting parameters are obtained to be HE∞ = 572.89 Oe and ME∞ = 0.6443 emu/gm, respectively. However the above equation holds only for n ≥ 2 and can not explain the steep relaxation for n = 1. Binek 21 recently proposed a relaxation model deducing a recursive formula with n dependence of HE (ME). The relation is given by \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}\begin{document}\begin{equation} H_E(n + 1) = H_E(n) - \gamma [H_E(n) - H'_{E\infty}]^3 \end{equation}\end{document}HE(n+1)=HE(n)−γ[HE(n)−HE∞′]3
where γ is a sample-dependent constant. Using γ = 1.2x10-6 and $H^\prime_{E\infty}$HE∞′ = 557 Oe, the theoretical values of HE (solid circle in Fig. 4(a)) are calculated using Eq. (1). Similarly, we have calculated the theoretical value of ME (solid triangle in Fig. 4(a)). It is remarkable that the theoretical results are well accordant with the experimental results not only for n >1 but also for n = 1. Thus, the spin configurationally relaxation model can describe our experimental results very well. To reveal the origin of exchange bias effect in this mixed valent manganites, the temperature dependence exchange bias parameter has also been studied. In this case the sample was cooled from the room temperature to the desired temperature with an applied magnetic field H = 7 kOe. Once the measuring temperature was reached, the magnetization loop was measured between 70 and -70 kOe, from which HE and ME were calculated. As shown in the Fig. 4(b) for SCMO550, the value of HE and ME decreases sharply and vanishes at the freezing temperature Tf (∼ 41 K). The temperature evolution of HE is typical for exchange bias system. As the sample is cooled through TN with an applied magnetic field, the exchange interaction between the AFM phase (core) and disordered FM phase induces an interface magnetic moment on the antiferromagnet which remains frozen at low temperature. Sequentially, below the freezing temperature Tf (< TN), the pinned or frozen spins provides the necessary pinning force to derive the ferromagnet back to a positive remanence on the recoil curve. Thus the EB effect observed through the unidirectional shift of the hysteresis loops, is induced by the interface exchange coupling between the disordered FM/SG domains and the CO AFM background. Again the SG phase can not induce the frozen FM spins above the freezing temperature, resulting HE=0. The value of ME also increases more than one order of magnitude below Tf due to enhancement of the magnetic irreversibility induced by the freezing of the spin glass region. The existence of low temperature (Tf) spin glass freezing has also been observed in other system and has also been attributed to spin glass like phases, occurring in uncompensated spin disordered surface around the ordered particles. Inset of Fig. 4(c) and 4(d) shows the cooling field dependence of exchange bias parameter HE, HC, ME and MC at 5 K for SCMO550 sample. All the above parameters increase sharply up to a field of 30 kOe. At the higher cooling field ME tends to saturate, but HE decreases with increasing the cooling field. MS is the saturation magnetization, determined using the extrapolation of high field magnetization at 1/H → 0. ME/MS is found to increase with HE. The decrease in HE is accompanied with increase in MC. This suggests that the growth of FM cluster at high cooling field could contribute partly to the decay of HE. Consequently, at the high cooling field not only the alignment of degree of FM cluster increases but the size of FM cluster also increases. So EB value reduces due to enhancement of size of FM cluster. According to Bean's relation 2 in case of FM/AFM thin films, the exchange bias field is inversely proportional to the FM layer thickness. The relation is given by \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}\begin{document}\begin{equation} H_E = - J_{ex} \frac{{S_{AFM} S_{FM} }}{{\mu _0 t_{FM} M_{FM} }} \end{equation}\end{document}HE=−JexSAFMSFMμ0tFMMFM
Jex is the exchange constant across the FM/AFM interface per unit area. SFM and SAFM are the interface ferromagnet and antiferromagnet magnetization. tFM and MFM are the thickness and magnetization of the FM layer. So for the strong cooling fields, FM clusters become very large. So, SFM and SAFM decrease and tFM increase, which decrease HE with increase of cooling magnetic field (Hcool). Due to the glassy behavior of surface spin at low temperature regime, including EB response, Niebieskikwiat and Salamon 5 have shown that the Hcool depends on HE by the following relation: \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}\begin{document}\begin{equation} - H_E \alpha \frac{{M_E }}{{M_S }}\alpha J_i \left[ {\frac{{J_i \mu _0 }}{{\left( {g\mu _B } \right)^2 }}L\left( {\frac{{\mu H_{cool} }}{{k_B T_f }}} \right) + H_{cool} } \right] \end{equation}\end{document}−HEαMEMSαJiJiμ0gμB2LμHcoolkBTf+Hcool
where L(x) is the Langevin function, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and μ= Nv μ0. In Fig. 4(b), the red color solid line corresponds to fit of Eq. (3) with an overall scale factor, considering Ji and Nv are the adjustable parameter. From this equation, the competition between the exchange interaction and the cooling field becomes evident. At low cooling field the first term dominates and depends on Ji2. However, for large cooling fields the second term (α Ji) becomes important, and for Ji < 0 the absolute value of HE would decrease or even more, HE can change its sign. The exchange constant determined from the best fit of the experimental result, shows negative (Ji < 0). This indicates an AFM coupling between the FM domains and the AFM host, explaining the tendency of ME/MS towards a reduction at high Hcool. So, with increasing Hcool, the magnetic coupling (zeeman coupling) between the spin of FM cluster and non-FM matrix at the interface increases as well, tending to orient them along the field direction. All these features of magnetic properties in the nanosized samples, which are almost universal across different CO manganites, could be accounted from our proposed phenomenological picture (core/shell structure) based on the surface disorder in the nanograins. We have attempted to explain all the observed results on nanometric samples through destabilization of CO and surface disorder at the shell of the nano grains. A schematic drawing of the structure is shown in the Fig. 5. Thus the EB effect can be expected based on the fact that there exists a coupling between the SG shell and the AFM core in the sample, where the SG shell acts as a “FM” component. In case of EB parameter, a low cooling field causes the spins of the SG shell to align partially along the external field, inducing the enhancement of unidirectional exchange interaction between the AFM core and the SG shell. This will contribute to the increase in HE and ME. For strong enough cooling field, the spins of almost all SG shell align along the cooling field, and the interaction between the AFM core and the SG shell approaches the maximum and, hence, HE and ME tend to saturate. Thus a disordered shell with a gradually ordered core region, with the surface effect or the proportion of shell thickness increases as the size of the grain decreases. We emphasize the fact that there is a gradual change in the magnetic order from the center to the boundary of these grains. At a certain grain size, the ferromagnetic shells of the nearby grains form a conducting path due to sufficient overlap of the electrons via double exchange leading to a gradual onset of a FM/SG behavior in the SCMO550. The nature of the states in the core region does not interfere in such a transport evidently. In summary, the robust charge ordering in bulk Sm0.5Ca0.5MnO3 is weakened in nano SCMO550, accompanied with the emergence of spin glass like phase with ferromagnetic state. In case of SCMO550 nanoparticle, the destabilization of CO at this stage, is primarily attributed to the surface reconstruction of the electronic states and the consequent renormalization of magnetic exchange. This destabilization of AFM/CO state enhances the double exchange mechanism and consequent FM tendencies as well. Frequency dependent ac susceptibility clearly suggests the spin glass like transition at 41 K in the nanometric form. Furthermore, after cooling the sample through the Neel temperature with an applied static magnetic field, this manganite nanoparticles exhibits that the exchange bias effect can be effectively tuned by the cooling field, which has very useful role for multifunctional application. The temperature dependence exchange bias parameter also suggest that the pinned or frozen disordered FM/SG spins give rise to the unidirectional shift of the magnetic hysteresis loops. The exchange bias effect reveals a magnetic training effect which can be described very well by spin relaxation model. Our phenomenological hypothesis (core-shell model) is clearly very general and explains qualitatively the exchange bias effects in charge ordering destabilized SCMO550 manganites nanoparticles.