A blended dye composed of five organic dyes, namely, Rose Bengal, Eosin-Y, Rhodamine-B, Fast Green, and Acridine Orange, was developed and tested for various solar cell parameters of ZnO based dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC). A comparison of the absorption spectra of dyes adsorbed on ZnO electrode revealed that the blended dye efficiently absorbs light in the entire visible region as compared with the individual dye. Six DSSCs were fabricated using the five individual dyes and one developed blended dye. The photovoltaic performance of the cells was examined by determining the various parameters such as open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current, energy conversion efficiency, fill factor, series resistance, and shunt resistance. Incident photon to current conversion efficiency was also measured to correlate the effect of the blended dye on the significant improvement of the solar cell parameters. The sensitization of ZnO electrode with blended dye has resulted in a maximum energy conversion efficiency of 7.9% of the solar cell.
Dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical solar cells are among the third generation photovoltaic devices. A typical dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) consists of several different material layers: Optically transparent conducting electrode, compact layer, a dye adsorbed on mesoporous nanocrystalline TiO2/ZnO acting as n-type semiconductor layer, hole transport layer (liquid or solid-state or gel electrolyte), and a Pt counterelectrode. Each material performs a specific task in the complex mechanism of a DSSC and contributes to the overall solar cell efficiency. The nanoparticle film provides a large internal surface area for harvesting of solar light. During operation, photons intercepted by the dye monolayer create excitons that are rapidly split at the nanoparticle surface, with electrons injected into the nanoparticle film and holes leaving the opposite side of the device by means of redox species (traditionally the I−/I3− couple) in a liquid or solid-state electrolyte. Two kinds of dyes, namely, metal-organic complexes (e.g., Ru-complexes) 10–12 and metal-free organic dyes, 13–15 have been widely used as sensitizers of DSSCs. Organic dyes have several advantages as photosensitizers for DSSCs: (1) Larger absorption coefficients than metal-complex photosensitizers; (2) variety in their structures provides possibilities for molecular design, e.g., the introduction of substituents, and thus allows for easy control of their absorption spectra; (3) inexpensive because they do not contain noble metals like ruthenium. This reduces the overall cost of the cell production. In the existing DSSCs, the ZnO or TiO2 films bond with just one kind of dye; therefore, the techniques to allow the films to absorb dyes of different colors would be a breakthrough to increase the efficiency of DSSC. It will allow the solar cell to absorb and use a broader spectrum of sunlight. Inakazu et al.16 reported TiO2 based liquid state DSSC consisting of dye bilayer structure. They reported that the layer by layer deposition of black and NK3705 dyes results in an efficiency of 9.16%. Individually black and NK3705 dyes gave an efficiency of 7.28% and 1.85%, respectively. Inspired by the formulation chemistry 17 which deals with mixing the compounds/substances that do not react with each other but produce a mixture with the desired characteristics/properties to suit a particular application/use, attempt has been made to produce a blended dye. According to the formulation chemistry each chemical substance contributes an advantage to the finished product for a particular application. By changing the composition of the mixture, its properties will change to be more or less suited to a particular useful application. There are various examples of formulation products such as adhesives, antiperspirants, cosmetics, deodorants, paints, perfumes, petroleum oil products, etc. Five organic dyes which are commonly used to sensitize the semiconductor layer in DSSC are Rose Bengal, Eosin-Y, Rhodamine-B, Fast Green, and Acridine Orange having absorption peak at 559, 524, 542, 625, and 430 nm, respectively. These dyes suffer from the fact that individually they absorb very small portion of the visible spectrum of solar radiations giving rise to a low efficiency of DSSCs. Since no single dye can perform efficiently in the entire visible spectrum, the present work is focused on the development of a dye having broadband absorption in the visible spectrum for efficient harvesting of light by DSSCs. The five dyes Rose Bengal, Eosin-Y, Rhodamine-B, Acridine Orange, and Fast Green were blended in appropriate proportion. The blended dye absorbs a larger fraction of the solar spectrum in the visible region ( 400–700 nm). The blended dye has been used to sensitize ZnO electrode of the quasi-solid-state DSSCs. The DSSCs were characterized for their various photovoltaic parameters and incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) in order to ascertain the performance of the blended dye.
Device
 Central to DSSC is a thick porous film of wide band gap semiconductor ZnO nanoparticles on compact layer. It provides a large surface area for the adsorption of light-harvesting molecules (dye). The dye coated ZnO layer is termed as electrode. Above this electrode there is a layer of polymer gel electrolyte. The area and the thickness of ZnO electrode were 1 cm2 and 10 μm, respectively. Thus, the active area of the cell was typically 1 cm2. Pt-sheet is used as counterelectrode. The purity, thickness, and area of the Pt-counterelectrode were 99.99% (Alfa Aesar, USA), 25×25 mm2, and 0.127 mm, respectively.

 The commercially available organic dyes Rose Bengal, Eosin-Y, Rhodamine-B, Acridine Orange, and Fast Green were used to sensitize the ZnO film. Figure 1 shows the molecular structures of all the five dyes. The blended dye is obtained by ultrasonically mixing the five dyes, namely, Rose Bengal, Eosin-Y, Rhodamine-B, Fast Green, and Acridine Orange, in different proportion for 2 days at 50 °C. The dyes were dissolved in ethanol having concentration (C) of 3.0×10−4M. Various blends were made and analyzed for their response to the visible region. The blend made with Acridine Orange (1×C), Rhodamine-B (2×C), Rose Bengal (3×C), Eosin-Y (2×C), and Fast Green (1×C) in the proportion (1×C:2×C:3×C:2×C:1×C) was found to exhibit the broadest response. The absorbance of the individual dyes along with the blended dye in ethanol is shown in Fig. 2. It is seen from the figure that the individual dye absorbs a narrow band of the visible region. The blended dye is found to have high absorbance of light in the range of 400–700 nm.
ZnO electrode
 Nanoporous semiconductor electrodes of thickness ∼10 μm were deposited on the compact layer using the synthesized ZnO powder. ZnO powder (2.4 g) was ground by a mortar and pestle with 4 ml de-ionized water and polyethylene glycol (PEG20 000, 1.2 g) to break up the aggregated particles into a dispersed paste. The paste was spread on the compact layer with a glass rod, using an adhesive tape as spacers. After drying in air, the films were sintered for 30 min at 400 °C in air. After sintering the ZnO electrodes were immersed in different dye solutions for 24 h. To minimize adsorption of impurities from moisture in the ambient air, the electrodes were dipped in the dye solution while they were still warm (∼80 °C). The dye covered electrodes were then rinsed with ethanol to remove excess dye on the surface and dried at room temperature. All the electrodes were examined for their absorbance in the visible region.
Polymer gel 
 The electrolyte consists of 0.5M polymer [polyethylene glycol (PEG) MW6000], 0.5M NaI (sodium iodide), 0.05M I2 (iodine), 0.16M CuI (copper iodide), acetonitrile solution, and ethylene carbonate: Propylene carbonate (60:40 w/w). NaI and I2 were dissolved in binary organic solvent mixture containing ethylene carbonate and propylene carbonate. PEG was added into the above solution and heated at 75–80 °C under vigorous stirring until a viscous gel was obtained, followed by cooling down to room temperature. Pt-sheet is used as counterelectrode to complete the cell structure. The active electrode area was typically 1 cm2.
Characterization and I-V
 The absorbance of the ZnO electrode, sensitized with various dyes, was measured using Shimadzu UV-visible-near infrared spectrophotometer (SolidSpec-3700). Current density-voltage (J-V) curves were obtained by using computerized digital Keithley source meter (Model 2400) and a tungsten halogen lamp as the light source. The lamp was calibrated close to AM1.5 SUN conditions from National Physical Laboratory (NPL), New Delhi. The IR radiations were cut using a water filter. The performance of a solar cell is quantified on macroscopic level with parameters such as open-circuit voltage Voc, short-circuit current Jsc, energy conversion efficiency η, and fill factor “FF.” The parameters such as ideality factor “n” and reverse saturation current Jo have also been estimated. The other two parameters are the series resistance Rs and shunt resistance Rsh. In a DSSC, Rs is mainly attributed to the bulk resistance of semiconductor oxide films, transparent conducting oxide electrode, metallic contacts, and electrolyte, while Rsh accounts for the leakage path across the dye/oxide interface, induced by defects in the bulk and at the surface of the oxide. These parameters are determined using the J-V characteristics. The values of η and FF were evaluated using the following relations:FF=(Jmax×Vmax)Jsc×Voc,η=(Jsc×Voc×FF)Pin,where Pin is the incident light power and Jmax and Vmax are the photocurrent and photovoltage for maximum power output (Pmax). Rsh was determined from the slope of the J-V curve of the cell at J=Jsc (V=0) and the Rs and n were calculated from the analysis of single J-V characteristics of the solar cell (constant illumination level method). Knowing the values of Rs, Rsh, and n the value of saturation current (Jo) was determined asJo=(Isc−Voc−RsIscRsh)exp(−qVocnkBT).
 Another important measurement in a DSSC is IPCE. In this measurement the efficiency is obtained at different wavelength of incident light. The IPCE of a cell is expressed in terms of the light-harvesting efficiency of the dye “LHE (λ),” the quantum yield of electron injection ηinj, and the efficiency of collecting the injected electrons ηcc at the back contact, i.e. IPCE (λ)=LHE(λ)ηinjηcc. The IPCE has been calculated using the relationIPCE(%)=1240×jsc(mA/cm2)λ(nm)×Pin(mW/cm2),where jsc is the short circuit current density, Pin is the light power density, and λ is the wavelength in nanometer. Jsc of the cells was determined from the J-V characteristics of the cells obtained at different wavelengths of light using narrow bandwidth ( 10–12 nm) interference filters (Vin Karola Instruments, USA). The intensity of the incident monochromatic radiations was kept constant and measured using optical power meter (Model 1815-C, Newport, USA).
Figure 2 shows the normalized UV-visible absorption spectra of all six dyes Rose Bengal (1×C), Eosin-Y (1×C), Rhodamine-B (1×C), Acridine Orange (1×C), Fast Green (1×C), and blended dye (1×C:2×C:3×C:2×C:1×C) in ethanol and adsorbed on ZnO electrode. ZnO electrode sensitized with individual dyes (1×C) was found to have one characteristic absorption peak while the ZnO electrode sensitized with blended dye (1×C:2×C:3×C:2×C:1×C) was found to have three characteristic absorption peaks at 532, 569, and 636 nm covering the entire visible region. After the dye is adsorbed on the ZnO electrode its absorption spectra broadened slightly with a redshift in the peak position (except Acridine Orange) compared to the absorbance spectra in ethanol. It is further seen that the blended dye has much higher absorbance and covers a broad visible region ( 400–700 nm). Figure 3 shows the I-V characteristics of the six DSSCs sensitized with Rose Bengal (1×C and 5×C), Eosin-Y (1×C), Rhodamine-B (1×C), Acridine Orange (1×C), Fast Green (1×C), and blended dye (1×C:2×C:3×C:2×C:1×C) under the same illumination conditions. Various cells were fabricated under identical conditions. The solar cell parameters Jsc, Voc, η, FF, Rs, Rsh, n, and Jo are given in Table I. It was found that when the solar cell was sensitized with the developed blended dye the photovoltaic performance of the solar cell improved to a large extent as compared to the individual dye due to the broader coverage of the solar spectrum. In individual form Rose Bengal (1×C) was found to be the most successful dye. It delivers Jsc=7.84 mA, Voc=0.56 V, FF=0.51, and η=2.4%. The cell sensitized with Rose Bengal dye having five times (5×C) concentration delivers Jsc=30.76 mA, Voc=0.51 V, FF=0.37, and η=5.56%. This cell has low fill factor. Eosin-y (1×C) shows a moderate performance and gives an efficiency of 1.5%. Rhodamine-B (1×C), Fast Green (1×C), and Acridine Orange (1×C) show lower photovoltaic performances (Table I). It may be mentioned that each individual dye has narrow region for light absorption. The solar cell having ZnO electrode sensitized with the blended dye (1×C:2×C:3×C:2×C:1×C) shows the maximum photovoltaic performance of Jsc=27.89 mA, Voc=0.59 V, FF=0.51, and η=7.9%. The cell reproducibility and consistency has been checked and a maximum variation of ±0.5% in efficiency (in case of blended dye) has been observed. The observed enhancement in the photovoltaic performance of the cell with blended dye can be attributed to the broad coverage of the visible spectra of solar radiations. The values of Rs and Rsh for all the cells are also listed in Table I. It is seen that there is not much effect on the value of Rs and Rsh. The parameters such as ideality factor n and reverse saturation current Jo have also been estimated for the present cells and are given in Table I. It is seen from the table that the value of n is close to 1.5 and the value of Jo is very low (=0.004 μA) for the cell fabricated using the developed blended dye. In case of solar cells, generally, a reduction in the value of Jo results in the increase of Voc due to enhancement in the charge separation at the oxide solution interface. It is clear from Table I that in the present case of blended dye the Voc has been increased. These results very strongly indicate that the enhancement in the photovoltaic properties of the DSSC prepared using the blended dye is due to the broad absorbance spectrum of the dye in the visible region. Besides the incident solar flux, the principal fundamental factor that limits the short-circuit current is the IPCE, which is expressed in terms of the LHE of the dye, the quantum yield of electron injection (ηinj), and the efficiency of collecting the injected electrons (ηcc) at the transparent back contact 25 given byIPCE(λ)=LHE(λ)ηinjηcc.A low IPCE is the result of either inefficient light-harvesting by the dye, inefficient charge injection into ZnO, or inefficient collection of injected electrons. A low LHE can be due to a low dye absorption coefficient over the solar spectrum, a low dye concentration, a thin ZnO film to support large concentration of adsorbed dye, which absorbs a significant fraction of the incident light, insufficient light scattering within the film, absorption of light by ZnO, or the redox electrolyte and dye degradation. A low ηinj can be due to dye desorption, dye aggregation, or the excited state levels of the dye lying below the conduction band edge of ZnO. A low ηcc is due to competition between fast recombination of photoinjected electrons with the redox electrolyte or oxidized dye and electron collection. Figure 4 shows the IPCE of all the six DSSCs sensitized with individual and blended dyes [Rose Bengal (1×C), Eosin-Y (1×C), Rhodamine-B (1×C), Acridine Orange (1×C), Fast Green (1×C), and blended dye (1×C:2×C:3×C:2×C:1×C)]. A maximum IPCE of ∼62% at 560 nm was observed for the blended dye. The observed maximum in IPCE is larger than the sum of IPCE of the five dyes. This is because the cells sensitized with blended dye have a concentration ratio of (1×C:2×C:3×C:2×C:1×C) of the individual dye Acridine Orange, Rose Bengal, Eosin-Y, Rhodamine-B, and Fast Green, whereas the cells sensitized with a single dye have a concentration ratio of 1×C only. Therefore, the total effect in blended dye is not the sum of five dyes. Since the fabrication parameters of all the six cells were the same except the dye, therefore, ηinj and ηcc would remain constant and the changes in the IPCE are only due to LHE (λ) of the dye. Hence, the observed increase in the value of IPCE by the use of blended dye ascertains the efficient light-harvesting in the visible spectrum. The examination of the data reveals that the efficiency of the Acridine dye is 0.06% and its IPCE is also less than 1%. Similarly, Fast Green also exhibits a very low efficiency and IPCE. Thus, a three-dye cosensitization is able to enhance the efficiency of the present system of DSSC. A critical analysis of Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy data of individual and the blended dyes would be useful in understanding the molecular engineering of the blended dye.
In conclusion, it was found that a blended dye composed of Rhodamine-B, Rose Bengal, and Eosin-Y in the proportion (2×C:3×C:2×C) exhibits efficient harvesting of light with strong and broad absorption in the visible spectrum ( 400–700 nm). Enhancement in efficiency and IPCE without affecting series and shunt resistances ascertains that the blended dye can be used very effectively for an efficient DSSC. This work may prove its worth in solar cell technology.