Designs for a broadband chirped pulse Fourier transform microwave (CP-FTMW) spectrometer are presented. The spectrometer is capable of measuring the 7–18GHz region of a rotational spectrum in a single data acquisition. One design uses a 4.2Gsamples∕s arbitrary waveform generator (AWG) to produce a 1μs duration chirped pulse with a linear frequency sweep of 1.375GHz. This pulse is sent through a microwave circuit to multiply the bandwidth of the pulse by a factor of 8 and upconvert it to the 7. 5–18.5GHz range. The chirped pulse is amplified by a traveling wave tube amplifier and broadcast inside the spectrometer by using a double ridge standard gain horn antenna. The broadband molecular free induction decay (FID) is received by a second horn antenna, downconverted, and digitized by a 40Gsamples∕s (12GHz hardware bandwidth) digital oscilloscope. The second design uses a simplified pulse generation and FID detection scheme, employing current state-of-the-art high-speed digital electronics. In this spectrometer, a chirped pulse with 12GHz of bandwidth is directly generated by using a 20Gsamples∕s AWG and upconverted in a single step with an ultrabroadband mixer. The amplified molecular emission is directly detected by using a 50Gsamples∕s digital oscilloscope with 18GHz bandwidth. In both designs, fast Fourier transform of the FID produces the frequency domain rotational spectrum in the 7–18GHz range. The performance of the CP-FTMW spectrometer is compared to a Balle–Flygare–type cavity-FTMW spectrometer. The CP-FTMW spectrometer produces an equal sensitivity spectrum with a factor of 40 reduction in measurement time and a reduction in sample consumption by a factor of 20. The CP-FTMW spectrometer also displays good intensity accuracy for both sample number density and rotational transition moment. Strategies to reduce the CP-FTMW measurement time by another factor of 90 while simultaneously reducing the sample consumption by a factor of 30 are demonstrated.
Rotational spectroscopy is a powerful structural tool in physical chemistry. The relationship between the molecular structure and the rotational transition frequencies (via the principal moments of inertia) provides one of the most direct methods for structure determination of gas phase samples. Other effects in the rotational motion of molecules, such as centrifugal distortion, hyperfine spectral structure from quadrupolar nuclei, and frequency shifts caused by tunneling motion, provide further characterization of the molecular structure and low frequency vibrational motions. 1–3 The development of the microwave Stark spectrometer by McAfee et al.4 and Hughes and Wilson 5 provided a general tool to physical chemists studying molecular structure. Measurements employing this waveguide spectrometer design examined several important topics in molecular structure including the existence of stable conformations separated by low energy barriers 6,7 and the tunneling dynamics of methyl group internal rotation. However, the need for sufficient vapor pressure in the waveguide cell limited the size range of molecules that could be interrogated by pure rotational spectroscopy. A period of major experimental advances culminated with the development of the molecular beam, Fabry–Pérot, Fourier transform microwave (FTMW) spectrometer by Balle and Flygare in 1979. 9–11 This spectrometer used time-domain microwave spectroscopy to provide sensitive detection of the rotational free induction decay (FID) following polarization by a short microwave pulse. By performing spectroscopy in the time domain, it became possible to achieve high frequency resolution without power broadening or the line shape distortion found in Stark modulation spectrometers. A second crucial advantage of this new technique was the ability to use pulsed molecular beam sources. This basic spectrometer design, with important modifications to improve sensitivity and frequency resolution, 12–14 currently dominates the field of pure rotational spectroscopy. The move to pulsed molecular beam sources has greatly expanded the range of molecular systems amenable to analysis by rotational spectroscopy. The rapid cooling of molecules in seeded molecular beams makes it possible to study large molecules with complex conformational structure. The molecular beam source can also stabilize weakly bound molecular clusters. 18–22 The evolution of pulsed molecular beam sources has led to the structural studies of radicals, ions, and their complexes. 23–27 The Fabry–Pérot FTMW spectrometer is a narrowband spectrometer. The use of a cavity with high quality factor (Q) limits the measurable frequency bandwidth to less than 1MHz in most spectrometer designs. The microwave cavity serves two functions: it decreases the power requirements for the microwave polarizing pulse and enhances the amplitude of the FID emission signal. Often these spectrometers are called “broadband” to indicate that they operate over a wide frequency range, typically about 10GHz. However, the process of acquiring a spectrum over the full operating range of the spectrometer is laborious. The spectrum scanning process requires a series of steps where the cavity is precisely tuned to resonance, a narrow frequency range is measured (∼500kHz), and the cavity is moved to its next position. This process is automated in many existing spectrometer designs so that a spectrum over a frequency range of several gigahertz can be obtained without user intervention, but the basic spectrometer design leads to long spectrum acquisition times. For example, on the cavity FTMW spectrometer in our laboratory, based on the “miniature FTMW” design of Suenram et al.,28 it takes about 14h to acquire a spectrum over an 11GHz range (the spectrometer performs ten signal averages with 500kHz frequency steps). A major contributor to the overall measurement time comes from the positioning of the cavity mirrors at each frequency step. By using our automated mini-FTMW spectrometer, we find that the spectrometer is making measurements for less than half (∼6h) of the 14h acquisition time. The time-consuming spectral acquisition process poses difficulties for using FTMW spectroscopy in analytical chemistry applications, optimizing source conditions for previously unknown species, and performing rotational spectroscopy of excited vibrational or electronic states prepared by laser excitation where long term laser frequency drift may occur. We describe a new approach to molecular beam FTMW spectroscopy that provides true broadband performance. The spectrometer exploits recent advances in arbitrary waveform generators and broadband signal digitizers to perform time-domain rotational spectroscopy over an 11GHz bandwidth for every signal acquisition event. The key to the spectrometer operation is the ability to create a phase-reproducible chirped microwave pulse. The chirped pulse duration is 1μs and produces an 11GHz linear frequency sweep to polarize the molecular sample in a time that is short compared to the pure dephasing (T2) time of about 10μs. The subsequent FID is digitized by using the high-speed, 8bit digitizer in a digital oscilloscope. All components in the spectrometer are fixed; there are no parts that need to be controlled for operation. This feature of the spectrometer makes it possible to implement strategies that produce significant reductions in the spectrum acquisition time while simultaneously reducing the sample consumption.
The chirped pulse FTMW (CP-FTMW) spectrometer consists of three basic components: (1) chirped microwave pulse generation, (2) microwave excitation pulse and molecular beam sample interaction region, and (3) FID detection. Figure 1 shows a general schematic of the spectrometer. Two spectrometer designs will be discussed—one uses additional microwave circuits to extend the capabilities of lower bandwidth arbitrary waveform generators (AWGs) and digital oscilloscopes, while the other simplified spectrometer design uses the current state-of-the-art AWGs and oscilloscopes to directly produce the excitation pulse and detect the broadband signal. The operating principles of both designs are identical, but their specific implementations differ.
Chirped microwave
 To perform broadband FTMW spectroscopy, we require a microwave source that can produce phase-reproducible linear frequency sweeps over an 11GHz frequency range in about 1μs (sweep rates greater than 1010MHz∕s). The short sweep durations are required so that the sample is polarized on a time scale faster than the pure dephasing of the rotational FID. In our 7. 5–18.5GHz spectrometer, the FID decays with a Gaussian profile in about 10μs (time to reach half of the maximum amplitude) and is dominated by Doppler broadening . 29 In practice, a 1μs pulse duration is chosen based on the specifications of the high-power p-i-n diode used to protect the receiver components from the polarizing pulse. The ability to average the FID signal in the time domain requires high phase stability of the microwave source. All frequency sources in the experiment are phase locked to a Rb-disciplined crystal oscillator operating at 10MHz (Stanford Research Systems FS725). The specified frequency accuracy of the 10MHz reference is ±5×10−10 and ultimately determines the accuracy of our microwave frequency measurements. For signal averaging the broadband FID in the time domain, the key feature of this clock is low phase noise (<−130dBc∕Hz at 10Hz). All microwave sources used in either microwave pulse production or FID signal processing are harmonics of this 10MHz reference frequency, ensuring that all light waves start with the same relative phase in each measurement event. The first CP-FTMW spectrometer design uses a 4.2Gsamples∕s AWG (Tektronix AWG710B) for chirped pulse generation. The phase stability of the internal clock in the 4.2Gsamples∕s AWG is insufficient for performing time-domain signal averaging of the 11GHz bandwidth molecular emission signal. Therefore, a phase-locked dielectric resonator oscillator (PDRO) operating at 3.96GHz is used as an external clock for the AWG. The Nyquist frequency range for the AWG operating at 3.96Gsamples∕s is only 1.98GHz. For this lower bandwidth AWG, we require a bandwidth multiplication circuit to produce pulses covering 11GHz of bandwidth. The microwave circuit, shown in Fig. 2, accomplishes two tasks: it expands the sweep bandwidth by a factor of 8 and it upconverts the frequencies into the 7. 5–18.5GHz frequency range (a full parts listing of the microwave circuit components can be found in the supplementary information30). Bandwidth extension is performed by using active frequency multipliers. These devices linearly increase the sweep bandwidth while maintaining the pulse duration. This circuit was designed to use only a single external microwave frequency and to permit simple filtering of the output of the frequency multipliers to improve the spectral purity of the final chirped pulse output. The details of this design are described below. We also note that both of the AWGs used in this work have two independently programmable digital data channels. We use one of these channels to provide a trigger pulse to the digital oscilloscope to initiate data collection. The other data channel provides a pulse to a digital pulse generator (Stanford Research Systems DG535) that provides TTL signals to control the molecular beam valve and the high-power pulsed microwave amplifier. We generate a linear frequency sweep from 1537.5to162.5MHz from the 3.96Gsamples∕s AWG that is the input pulse to the microwave circuit shown in Fig. 2. The AWG output is filtered with a 1700MHz low pass filter to remove spurious signals related to mixing of the waveform output and the 3.96GHz external clock of the waveform generator. The first step in creating the microwave polarizing pulse is to upconvert the direct output of the AWG into the microwave frequency range. This step is accomplished by using a broadband microwave mixer and a PDRO source operating at 9.9GHz. The output of the mixer contains two linear sweep sidebands above and below the 9.9GHz carrier frequency. To extend the bandwidth of the pulse by using microwave frequency multipliers, it is necessary to isolate a single side band. We use a 13 pole microwave bandpass filter (3dB points at 9.748 and 8.232GHz and 40dB attenuation at 9.9GHz) to extract the lower sideband and to reject any residual microwave power at the 9.9GHz carrier frequency. Bandwidth extension of the linear frequency sweep occurs in two stages. The bandwidth of the microwave pulse is first increased by a factor of 4 by using an active frequency quadrupler. The output of the frequency quadrupler is filtered in a high pass filter with a 25GHz cutoff frequency to remove the residual power leakage and lower harmonics of the sweep that appear on the output of the quadrupler. The frequency multiplied sweep is subsequently downconverted by 19.8GHz in a broadband mixer. The local oscillator for this mixer is provided by the frequency doubled output of the 9.9GHz PDRO source. The mixer output is amplified in a broadband microwave amplifier ( 12–26GHz range with 32dB gain) and sent to an active frequency doubler to increase the sweep bandwidth by a factor of 8 overall after the two multiplier stages. The output of this active doubler is directed to a second high pass filter with a 26GHz cutoff frequency. Finally, the sweep is downconverted to the 7. 5–18.5GHz range by using a broadband mixer with the 19.8GHz signal as the local oscillator. The final microwave pulse is preamplified in a low-noise, solid-state amplifier and sent through a programmable attenuator before being directed to the input of a high-power microwave amplifier. By following the initial calibration of this circuit, it has operated without adjustment. The final step of microwave pulse creation is amplification to high peak power for use in the experiments. The power requirements for CP-FTMW spectroscopy will be discussed in the next section. We have used several microwave power amplifiers in our experiments including a 5W solid-state amplifier (Microwave Power L0818-37, 8–18GHz) and pulsed traveling wave tube amplifiers (TWTAs) with peak powers of either 300W or 2kW (Amplifier Research 200T8618A or Amplifier Research 1000TP8G18, 7–18GHz). All of these amplifiers have demonstrated sufficient phase stability in successive pulses to permit time-domain averaging of the FID. The final linear frequency sweep microwave pulse generated by the 3.96Gsamples∕s AWG and amplified by the 2kW TWTA is displayed in Fig. 3. The top panel shows the pulse measured in the time domain by mixing a sample of the amplifier output with a single frequency microwave source at 18.99GHz in a broadband mixer. The frequency bandwidth of the pulse is demonstrated in the middle panel where the Fourier transform of the time-domain pulse is shown. To characterize the chirp of the microwave pulse, we have performed a time-frequency analysis of the pulse (a spectrogram) by using a moving window Fourier transform method. This analysis applies a 10ns wide Kaiser–Bessel window function of the data to select a small time slice of the pulse. The Fourier transform of each time slice is represented in the bottom panel of Fig. 3. This analysis method shows the linear frequency sweep of the microwave pulse and the signal purity at each instantaneous frequency. The spurious signals in the pulses created with this technique are at least 20dB lower in power than the instantaneous sweep frequency across the full 11GHz range of the pulse. Recent advances in high-speed AWGs have greatly simplified production of the chirped pulses. A 20Gsamples∕s AWG (Tektronix AWG7102) is used to create a chirped pulse with linear frequency sweep from 500MHzto10GHz. The actual output of the AWG includes signals above 10GHz that come from the mixing of the primary pulse with the 20GHz sample clock. This mixing produces an image sweep from 19.5to10GHz. We use this image signal to create a chirped pulse with 12GHz of bandwidth by filtering the output of the 20Gsamples∕s AWG with a 12.2GHz low pass filter. The AWG pulse is upconverted in a broadband mixer by using a PDRO at 18.99GHz to create the final chirped pulse covering the 6. 79–18.49GHz region. Spectrograms of the chirped pulse output from the AWG and the upconversion mixer are shown in Fig. S1 (Ref. 30) to illustrate the pulse shape when part of the AWG image sweep is included in the pulse. This simple upconversion process has an important technical advantage. The mixing process retains the dynamic range for the pulse shape amplitude of the pulse (the AWG has 8bit vertical resolution). In contrast, the use of active frequency multipliers in a bandwidth extension circuit restricts the input power range where linear amplitude response is achieved to a dynamic range of about 10. The chirped pulses used in these measurements have a flat amplitude profile, and for these pulses, the bandwidth extension circuit performs well. However, the bandwidth extension circuit will not be suitable for applications where amplitude shaping of the excitation pulse is required.
Microwave excitation pulse and molecular beam
 The vacuum chamber design for a CP-FTMW spectrometer requires a minimum of components. The high-power polarizing pulse is broadcast into the molecular beam interaction region by using a WRD-750 double-ridge standard gain horn. A second gain horn is used to collect the molecular emission. We have used two horn sets in the CP-FTMW spectrometer: Amplifier Research AT4530 and ATM 750-448-C3. Both of these designs have gains of 20dBi and have −3dB beam widths of about 20°–30° across the operating frequency band. The currently operating spectrometer uses the ATM 750-448-C3 horns with a separation of 75cm. At this distance, there is about 3–6dB of transmission loss between the gain horns over the frequency range of the spectrometer ( 7–18GHz). This wide separation permits multiple nozzle source operation and will be described below. The current spectrometer has a 120cm length ISO-500 (50cm diameter) vacuum chamber with two 10in. diffusion pumps (Varian VHS 10) backed by a mechanical pump–roots blower combination (Edwards E2M40 and EH250). The high-power polarizing pulse and molecular emission are coupled into and out of the chamber by using double-ridge waveguide bulk heads with Kapton windows (ATM 750-230-2-2) to maintain vacuum. All interior surfaces of the molecular beam chamber are covered by microwave foam absorber that is secured to metal foil backing (Emerson and Cuming HR 25/ML). The microwave absorber is needed to prevent long-lived resonances in the molecular beam chamber that produce spurious microwave contributions to the collected microwave signal. The sample is introduced into the interaction region through the free jet expansion of a pulsed solenoid valve (General Valve Series 9). The nozzle diameter is 1mm and the pulse duration is about 500μs. Molecular samples are typically 0.1% gas mixtures in “first run” neon (an 80:20 mixture of neon and helium). The nozzle backing pressure is typically 1atm. Specific conditions for each measurement are provided in the figure captions.

 By following sample polarization by the high-power chirped pulse, there is a broadband molecular emission or FID. A key component of the spectrometer is a broadband, low-noise receiver to amplify the weak molecular emission. This receiver, shown schematically in Fig. 1 and in more detail in Fig. S2,30 contains a low-noise amplifier (LNA), components to protect the LNA from the high-power polarization pulse, and a downconverter to transfer the 7–18GHz molecular signal to lower frequency for digitization. The first two components in the detection assembly are a high-power p-i-n diode (Advanced Control Components ACLM-4539-C36-1K) and a single-pole switch (Advanced Technical Materials S1517) needed to protect the LNA. The p-i-n diode is rated for a 1kW peak power with pulse duration of 1μs and has a measured recovery time of <100ns. The leakage peak power from the diode is still above the damage threshold for the LNA, so the microwave switch is placed after the diode. This switch is controlled by the same TTL pulse that activates the high-power amplifier pulse output. Combining these two devices add about 4.5dB to the overall receiver noise figure through their insertion loss. After passing through the diode and switch, the rotational FID is amplified by a high-gain (38dB), low-noise (noise Fig. 1.4) solid-state broadband microwave amplifier (Miteq AMF-5F-0800-1800-4-10P-1). We have used two digital oscilloscopes to digitize the broadband FID signal. When the 40Gsamples∕s oscilloscope (Tektronix TDS6124C, hardware bandwidth of 12GHz, 8bit) is used for detection, the FID must be downconverted to the dc-12GHz frequency range. This is accomplished by using an ultrabroadband triple balance mixer with a PDRO source at 18.990GHz as the local oscillator. The downconverted FID signal passes through a low pass filter (12.2GHz cutoff) that removes the local oscillator signal that leaks through the mixer. A dc block (250MHz cutoff, 18.5GHz pass band) follows the low pass filter to remove 1∕f noise prior to digitization. Downconversion does not appreciably affect the signal-to-noise ratio of the receiver because the noise figure is dominated by the LNA and the protection devices that proceed it. However, there is a significant overlap between the molecular emission band ( 7–18.5GHz) and the downconversion band (500MHz–12GHz). The finite isolation of the triple balance mixer produces image peaks in the spectrum at the 1%–10% level in the frequency overlap region ( 7–12GHz). The frequencies of the images can be calculated from the measured spectrum and removed with postprocessing of the data. Continued advances in the digitization rates and hardware bandwidths of digital oscilloscopes have also produced simplification in the FID detection process. The latest generation digital oscilloscope (Tektronix DPO70000) offers 50Gsamples∕s digitization rates with hardware bandwidths up to 20GHz (with digital signal processing enhancements). We have used this oscilloscope to directly digitize the FID following the LNA. The lack of a downconversion step in the FID detection removes the problem of image peaks in the spectrum. For either oscilloscope, data acquisition is initiated by a pulse from the AWG that is created on one of the two digital marker channels. Both oscilloscopes are phase locked to the 10MHz reference from the Rb-disciplined master clock to permit coherent averaging of the FID in the time domain. The repetition rate of the experiment is currently limited by the data processing speeds of the oscilloscope. When using the 40Gsamples∕s digital oscilloscope to digitize the downconverted FID for a 20μs duration (800 000 point record length), the repetition rate is limited to 3.5Hz. The latest 50Gsamples∕s digital oscilloscope shows a speed improvement of a factor of 3 and can achieve a repetition rate of 11Hz (when there is no digital signal processing). Data processing speeds of the digital oscilloscopes will continue to improve as the base computer platforms incorporate newer components. The current repetition rate of 11Hz for the 50Gsamples∕s digital oscilloscope is suitable for most rotational spectroscopy studies. In particular, many experiments use a pulsed laser for sample creation (in a laser ablation source) or molecular excitation and the spectrometer repetition rate is limited to 10–50Hz by this device. In all timing comparisons given in this work, we assume that the CP-FTMW spectrometer is running at a 10Hz repetition rate.
SPECTROMETER
 Three keys for optimal spectrometer performance are linear sweep excitation, high microwave peak power, and digital signal processing of the rotational FID. The first two are necessary for optimal polarization of the molecular sample, and the third improves the frequency resolution at baseline.

 The description of the macroscopic polarization by using a fast frequency sweep has been previously presented by McGurk et al.31 to describe experiments where the molecular resonance was swept through a fixed microwave frequency by using the molecular Stark effect. In this work, McGurk et al. pointed out that fast passage excitation is an efficient way to excite the molecular sample. In a later work, Wolf has demonstrated fast passage excitation by chirped millimeter pulses for rotational spectroscopy. In this experiment, a chirped pulse covering 280MHz ( 72840–73120MHz) in 45μs, created by using a backward wave oscillator (BWO), was used to sweep over the 6–5 molecular transition of two OCS isotopomers. In this measurement, the sweep duration of the chirped pulse is slow compared to the time scale of the transient molecular emission. The molecular rotational transition is detected through the heterodyne mixing of the fixed-frequency molecular transient emission with the continuing linear frequency sweep of the BWO. A significant frequency determination uncertainty is associated with this measurement process. More recently, Khodos et al. have described improved methods to analyze the transient signals in an experiment where the sweep duration is slow compared to the molecular emission. The important advance enabled by the new high-speed AWG technology is that it is now possible to perform broadband chirped pulse excitation in a time scale shorter compared to the transient emission time (T2). In the CP-FTMW spectrometer described here, the chirped pulse excitation of the broadband spectrum is separated from the broadband detection of the FID as occurs for other Fourier transform spectroscopy methods. In their study of fast passage excitation by using the molecular Stark shift, McGurk et al. calculated the polarization of the molecular sample by a linear frequency sweep by solving the Bloch equations for a single rotational transition. The measurement of Wolf32 supported the basic results of their work. Our measurements by using the CP-FTMW spectrometer further confirm these results. The electric field for a chirped pulse that produces a linear frequency sweep isE(t)=Emaxei(ω0t+1∕2αt2),where Emax is the peak electric field of the pulse (constant across the chirped pulse) and the instantaneous frequency is:ωinst=ddt(ω0t+12αt2)=ω0+αt.
The linear sweep rate is given by α in the two previous expressions. The sweep range for the pulse is linearly related to the pulse duration (tpulse),Δω=α⋅tpulse.
 Unlike simple transform limited pulses with a single carrier frequency, the chirped pulse provides a separation of the bandwidth and the pulse duration. This makes it possible to separately control the frequency range of the excitation and the amount of energy delivered to the sample. For microwave spectroscopy, the linear frequency sweep pulse has been shown by McGurk et al. to be particularly efficient at polarizing the molecular sample. One of their main results is that the signal from chirped pulse excitation has the formS∝ω⋅μ2⋅Epulse⋅ΔN0⋅(πα)1∕2,where ω represents the frequency, μ the transition dipole moment, Epulse the electric field strength, and ΔN0 the population difference at equilibrium, assumed to be unchanged by the pulse (the weak pulse limit, valid for high bandwidth measurements for all practical amplifier choices). For chirped pulse excitation, Epulse is constant for all frequencies in the pulse and is fixed by the maximum peak power of the amplifier. This result has been simplified from the form given by McGurk et al. because their analysis assumed that detection would be accomplished through heterodyne mixing of the emission and the polarizing pulse; in our spectrometer, as mentioned above, the chirped pulse has a duration shorter than the T2 time (∼10μs), and so molecular emission is directly detected in the absence of the polarizing pulse. A key aspect of Eq. (4) is that the signal scales as α−1∕2. For a fixed pulse duration, this means that the signals decrease with the square root of the bandwidth, in contrast to the case of transform limited pulses, where the signal linearly decreases with excitation bandwidth. The difference in this scaling comes from the fact that for transform limited pulses, increasing the bandwidth is achieved by decreasing the pulse duration and, therefore, decreasing the total energy delivered to the sample (at a fixed peak power). By using the linear sweep chirped pulse, the maximum amount of pulse energy, limited by T2, can be delivered to the sample for any excitation bandwidth. To more clearly demonstrate the efficiency of chirped pulse excitation, we have measured the 10-00 pure rotational transition of 1-propyne (17091.743MHz) with both chirped and transform limited polarizing pulses of varying bandwidths. Chirped pulses were created as previously described; transform limited pulses were produced by mixing an AWG-generated Gaussian profile with the output of a microwave synthesizer tuned to resonance. For all measurements in this test, a 5W solid-state microwave amplifier was used to amplify the polarizing pulse. A single pole single throw (SPST) switch was placed on the amplifier output to blank the noise power of the amplifier during FID detection. This switch has an insertion loss of about 3dB across the 7–18GHz frequency range and reduces the peak power of the chirped pulse. With 2.5W of peak power delivered to the sample, the molecular rotational signal was optimal for a 19MHz bandwidth chirped pulse or a 4.08MHz bandwidth (108ns pulse duration) Gaussian pulse. The results of these measurements are shown in Fig. 4. This figure verifies the α−1∕2 signal scaling predicted by Eq. (4). It also illustrates the favorable signal scaling of the chirped pulse for large bandwidth measurements compared to transform limited pulse shapes. We have also tested the sweep rate dependence of Eq. (4) by fixing the bandwidth of the chirped pulse and varying the pulse duration. These measurements (not shown) also display the α−1∕2 signal dependence. We also note that the maximum signal for the propyne transition is the same for optimal excitation by using either the chirped or transform limited pulse.

 For CP-FTMW spectroscopy, the power requirements depend on the pulse properties (bandwidth and duration) and the molecular properties (the magnitude of the dipole moment). Here, we provide rough estimates of the power requirements in the CP-FTMW spectrometer, and these results are supported by our experience in operating the spectrometer for the past year. In this discussion, we do not explicitly include the rotational dependence of the transition dipole moment and simply classify molecules based on their total dipole moment. The data in Fig. 4 can be used for a more detailed analysis of spectrometer performance. Relative to the Balle–Flygare cavity FTMW spectrometer, more peak power is required by the CP-FTMW spectrometer in order to optimally polarize the sample for two reasons. First, the CP-FTMW spectrometer lacks the passive amplification that the Fabry–Pérot cavity provides. The peak power requirement inversely scales with the cavity Q. The miniature cavity FTMW spectrometer in our laboratory has a cavity Q on the order of 10 000. Therefore, to optimally excite the same transition, the CP-FTMW spectrometer (Q=1) roughly requires a factor of 10 000 more power. Second, while the cavity FTMW spectrometer approximately covers 1MHz of bandwidth with each microwave pulse, the CP-FTMW spectrometer covers 11GHz. This results in approximately another factor of 11 000 power requirement. The cavity FTMW spectrometer in our laboratory requires on the order of 10μW of peak input power (0.1W intracavity power) to optimally excite molecules with a 1D dipole moment. Therefore, the CP-FTMW spectrometer should require on the order of 1kW to optimally excite the same transition by using an 11GHz sweep of the same pulse duration. In practice, we find that a 1μs, 11GHz pulse from the 2kW TWTA can optimally excite most molecules with dipole moments greater than 0.7D.

 One new issue in CP-FTMW spectroscopy is signal leakage in the frequency domain spectrum. With the large dynamic range of the CP-FTMW measurements, the frequency-domain side lobes of strong rotational transitions can cover a large spectral region near baseline. These large side lobes can make it difficult to observe weak rotational transitions with frequencies close to a strong transition, a situation commonly encountered when measuring the rotational spectrum of isotopomers in low natural abundance. For example, the rotational transitions of C13 isotopes of large molecules have small frequency shifts from the transitions of the dominant normal species. In the broadband spectrometer, where there is no cavity to provide frequency filtering, it is necessary to perform signal processing of the FID to improve the baseline resolution of transitions separated by small frequencies. Several time domain filters exist that provide a trade off between signal leakage (side lobe suppression) and resolution (defined as the line width at FWHM). In Fig. 5, we show the frequency domain spectrum of cyclopropylacetylene following the application of several standard filters to the rotational FID signal. In this spectrum, the 211-110 transition of a C13 isotopomer (13105.2MHz) is located near the 202-101 transition of the normal species (13103.8MHz). This figure shows that side lobe suppression significantly reduces the spectrometer linewidth at baseline, making it easier to detect weak transitions in the proximity of strong ones. We employ a Kaiser–Bessel 35,36 window function (69dB of side lobe suppression and a 97% increase in the FWHM linewidth) in the broadband rotational spectra reported in this paper.
In this section, we illustrate the dynamic range and sensitivity of the CP-FTMW spectrometer. We also compare the CP-FTMW spectrometer performance to that of a miniature Balle–Flygare cavity FTMW spectrometer 28 in our laboratory.

 The measurement of the pure rotational spectrum of OCS (0.4% dissolved in a mixture of 80% neon and 20% helium), shown in Fig. 6, is used to illustrate the dynamic range of the current state-of-the-art (20Gsamples∕s AWG and 50Gsamples∕s oscilloscope) CP-FTMW spectrometer. After the acquisition of a single FID, the signal-to-noise ratio for the 1-0 transition of the normal species is ∼3500:1 and the 1-0 transition of the O18CS species is easily observed in natural abundance (Fig. 6, left panel). After 4000 time-domain averages of the broadband FID, the signal-to-noise ratio for the normal species transition has grown to ∼200000:1 and now the OC18S34 1-0 transition is observed in natural abundance (Fig. 6, right panel). With this 4000 shot measurement, the lowest abundance isotopomer we observe is O18C13S (0.0021% natural abundance). These results, as well as comparable results obtained with the bandwidth extended (4.2Gsamples∕s AWG and 40Gsamples∕s oscilloscope) CP-FTMW spectrometer are given in Table I, which lists the measured frequencies and relative intensities for the 1-0 transition of all observed OCS isotopomers. Expanded spectral regions showing the intensity accuracy of the direct detect spectrometer after 4000 time-domain averages of the FID can be found in Fig. S3.30 These measured values are compared to the frequencies obtained by cavity FTMW spectroscopy by Suenram et al. at NIST (Refs. 37 and 38) and to the calculated relative intensities based on natural abundance. We do not correct for the isotopic variation of the dipole moment. These comparisons indicate that the CP-FTMW frequency measurements are within about 4kHz of the NIST measurements. The relative intensities over a dynamic range of 44 400:1 are obtained within about 15%–20%. The CP-FTMW spectrometer is also capable of measuring accurate relative intensities due to variations of the transition strength of the oscillator. In Fig. 7, the CP-FTMW rotational spectrum of 1,2,2,2-tetrafluoroethyl difluoromethyl ether (also known by its trade names of suprane or desflurane) over 10 000 signal averages is plotted versus a spectral simulation by using predicted frequencies and intensities from Pickett’s SPCAT program. The prediction is generated by using previously measured rotational constants (A=2330.14MHz, B=865.37MHz, C=753.18MHz) and dipole moment components (μa=1.48D, μb=0.761D, μc=0.243D). In this case, the μc-component of the dipole moment is approximately six times weaker than the μa-component. Since the transition intensity scales with μ2 in the weak pulse limit [Eq. (4)], the c-type transitions are on the order of 36 times weaker than the a-type transitions. Note that below 16GHz, the intensities of the rotational spectrum are in excellent agreement with the predicted intensities. At high frequencies, we notice that the CP-FTMW measured intensities become progressively lower than predicted. We attribute this effect to poor coupling efficiency of the horn antenna above 16GHz and to power droop in the TWTA.

 Since the CP-FTMW spectrometer measures the entire 7–18GHz range of the spectrum in every valve pulse, the sensitivity of the spectrometer is an adjustable parameter. The time jitter between successive signal acquisitions is sufficiently low that averaging the FIDs in the time domain is possible with minimal (⩽10%) signal loss over 10 000 averages. The advantage to making a broadband measurement is that only one has to measure the spectrum until an adequate signal-to-noise ratio is achieved. This is in contrast to a narrow band spectrometer where the entire spectrum must be measured at high sensitivity, which is time consuming even without signal averaging. The flexible measurement time of the spectrometer is highlighted in Fig. 8, where the rotational spectrum of suprane is shown after a single valve pulse (using a single microwave polarizing pulse and collecting a single FID), 100 signal averages, and 10 000 signal averages. After a single valve pulse, many intense lines of the spectrum are evident. After 100 signal averages, requiring less than 30s of acquisition time, a spectrum with sufficient signal-to-noise ratio (approximately 750:1 on the most intense transitions in the spectrum) for many applications is achieved.
Comparison to Balle–Flygare cavity FTMW 
 We have performed a side-by-side comparison of the CP-FTMW spectrometer to the miniature Balle–Flygare cavity FTMW spectrometer in our laboratory. We choose the mini-FTMW spectrometer because its smaller microwave beam waist is compatible with laser excitation experiments, the main application of CP-FTMW spectroscopy in our laboratory. After performing comparisons on a number of molecular systems, we estimate that the CP-FTMW spectrometer matches the sensitivity of this cavity FTMW spectrometer after 10 000 signal averages or 16.7min at a 10Hz repetition rate. For these comparisons, the mini-FTMW was set to acquire ten signal averages with 500kHz frequency steps, resulting in 220 000 total valve shots for an 11GHz spectrum. The CP FTMW performance represents a significant decrease in measurement time compared to the cavity FTMW spectrometer (14h, by using the settings stated above). A comparison of the rotational spectrum of cyclopropanecarboxaldehyde as measured by the CP-FTMW spectrometer (using 10 000 signal averages) and the Balle–Flygare cavity FTMW spectrometer (using ten signal averages per step, 500kHz frequency steps) is shown in Fig. 9. The cavity FTMW spectrum intensity has been scaled so that the noise levels of the two spectra are approximately equal. A number of transitions of low-abundance isotopomers are labeled in the figure; these signal levels are approximately equal in the two spectra.
Methods to decrease the measurement
 The basic CP-FTMW spectrometer design is capable of acquiring full rotational spectra approximately a factor of 50 more quickly than the Balle–Flygare cavity FTMW spectrometer, and furthermore, the accurate intensity information in the CP-FTMW spectra can be used to aid spectral assignments. Nevertheless, there are still avenues for improvement of the spectrometer performance. We will briefly discuss two approaches to increasing the spectrometer sensitivity or, alternatively, decreasing the measurement time and sample consumption necessary to reach a target sensitivity level. The first of these approaches makes use of multiple pulsed valve nozzles to exploit the coherent N-emitter effect. After polarization, the emitted power from the sample scales as N2, where N is the number of emitters. In FTMW spectroscopy, the emitted field rather than the emitted power is detected, and so the signal linearly increases with the number of emitters. However, because the signal-to-noise ratio only scales as the square root of the number of averages, this linear scaling offers a tremendous advantage. As an example, consider the performance of a one nozzle and of a three nozzle system. The threefold higher signal in the three nozzle system means that nine FIDs of the one nozzle system need to be averaged in order to match the signal-to-noise ratio of a spectrum obtained from a single FID of the three nozzle system. In addition to reducing the measurement time by a factor of 9 (N2), the three nozzle system has also reduced the overall sample consumption by a factor of 3 (N). These advantages are shown more clearly in Fig. 10, where the relative performances of a one, two, and three nozzle system are demonstrated for a portion of the pure rotational spectrum of suprane. The WRD750 gain horn broadcast and receive geometry show no decline in performance for separation distances of 1m. Although we have used a three nozzle system for illustration, a larger number of sources can be accommodated in the open interaction region of the CP-FTMW spectrometer to provide further performance gains. The ultimate design limits need to balance the added complexity and the addition vacuum pumping requirements of a multinozzle experimental setup with the sensitivity gains. A second, independent approach to improving spectrometer sensitivity is to collect more than one FID during the ∼500μs valve pulse. We have been able to acquire as many as ten FIDs in one valve pulse by using a feature of the digital oscilloscope which segments the digitizer memory and allows multiple short records to be spliced into a single long record. Figure 11 shows the results of this “multi-FID” operation mode used with a three nozzle system. The number of FIDs that can be acquired is determined by the amount of high-speed memory in the digital oscilloscope and sets our current limit to ten events (upgrades to increase the memory depth by a factor of 16 are available). 90 shots of a single nozzle, single FID per pulse system are required to match the signal-to-noise ratio of a three nozzle system in multi-FID mode. The combination of these approaches produces a 90-fold reduction in measurement time and a 30-fold reduction in sample consumption. The bottom panels of Fig. 11 show that the spectra of the first, fifth, and tenth FID acquisition in our three nozzle example have similar signal levels, suggesting that more FID acquisitions per valve pulse are possible.
Two designs for a broadband, CP-FTMW spectrometer capable of measuring an 11GHz ( 7–18GHz) frequency range in each FID have been presented. The first CP-FTMW spectrometer design uses microwave circuits to extend the bandwidth of lower sample rate AWGs and uses broadband downconversion of the FID to move the molecular emission into a detection band that matches the hardware frequency limits of the digital oscilloscope. Both of these strategies can be use to create a broadband CP-FTMW spectrometer that uses lower cost high-speed digital electronics. The second design uses the current state-of-the-art digital electronics to simplify the experimental design. Other than microwave amplifiers, this spectrometer requires only a single frequency upconversion stage to move the chirped pulse sweep frequencies into the 7–18GHz microwave range. Continued advances in technology will eventually make it possible to build a direct digital spectrometer where the excitation pulse is directly created by the AWG and the molecular emission is directly digitized. For frequencies up to 18GHz, the ability to directly measure the FID is demonstrated in this work. A direct digital design where the user has complete control over the excitation pulse properties promises to provide a rich development platform for broadband double-resonance spectroscopy techniques that build off developments in two dimensional-NMR spectroscopy. We have demonstrated several benefits of performing broadband FTMW spectroscopy. Perhaps the biggest advantage of the CP-FTMW spectrometer is the reduction in measurement time required to obtain a broadband spectrum. As shown in Fig. 8, a broadband spectrum can often be obtained in a small number of data acquisition events (although additional averaging is usually desired to improve sensitivity). This performance characteristic can be exploited to make it easier to optimize source conditions for the production of novel molecular species. In many cases, source optimization can be achieved by using lower bandwidth spectrometer designs such as the search accelerated, correct intensity method recently introduced by Grubbs et al. The ability to obtain accurate intensity information for both number density (Table I) and transition moment (Fig. 7) can reduce the time required to analyze molecular rotational spectra, especially when graphical analysis programs are used. Finally, the lack of components that require mechanical adjustment is a significant advantage over cavity-FTMW spectrometers. The CP-FTMW spectrometer has no measurement “dead time,” so that improved data collection methods directly reduce the measurement time. By using a single nozzle source and acquiring a single FID, the CP-FTMW spectrometer acquires the broadband 7–18GHz spectrum about 40 times faster than a cavity-FTMW spectrometer while consuming 20 times less sample. We have demonstrated two approaches to decrease the measurement time another factor of 90, while decreasing sample consumption an additional factor of 30. Larger gains may be possible by extending the multinozzle source and multi-FID acquisition approaches beyond the design parameters we have presented. The cumulative effect of the improved performance of the CP-FTMW spectrometer in these areas suggests that it will be possible to perform structure determination by molecular rotational spectroscopy on a vastly expanded range of molecular systems.